Abdominal aortic aneurysms often grow slowly without symptoms, making them difficult to detect. Some aneurysms never rupture. Many start small and stay small; others expand over time, some quickly.
If you have an enlarging abdominal aortic aneurysm, you might notice: Deep, constant pain in your abdomen or on the side of your abdomen, Back pain, A pulse near your bellybutton.
If you have pain, especially if pain is sudden and severe, seek immediate medical help.
Aneurysms can develop anywhere along the aorta, but most aortic aneurysms occur in the part of your aorta that's in your abdomen. A number of factors can play a role in developing an aortic aneurysm, including:
Hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis). Atherosclerosis occurs when fat and other substances build up on the lining of a blood vessel.
High blood pressure. High blood pressure can damage and weaken the aorta's walls.
Blood vessel diseases. These are diseases that cause blood vessels to become inflamed.
Infection in the aorta. Rarely, a bacterial or fungal infection might cause an abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Trauma. For example, being in a car accident can cause an abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Abdominal aortic aneurysm risk factors include:
Tobacco use. Smoking is the strongest risk factor. It can weaken the aortic walls, increasing the risk not only of developing an aortic aneurysm, but of rupture. The longer and more you smoke or chew tobacco, the greater the chances of developing an aortic aneurysm.
Age. These aneurysms occur most often in people age 65 and older.
Being male. Men develop abdominal aortic aneurysms much more often than women do.
Being white. People who are white are at higher risk of abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Family history. Having a family history of abdominal aortic aneurysms increases your risk of having the condition.
Other aneurysms. Having an aneurysm in another large blood vessel, such as the artery behind the knee or the aorta in the chest, might increase your risk of an abdominal aortic aneurysm.
Tears in one or more of the layers of the wall of the aorta (aortic dissection) or a ruptured aneurysm are the main complications. A rupture can cause life-threatening internal bleeding. In general, the larger the aneurysm and the faster it grows, the greater the risk of rupture.
Signs and symptoms that your aortic aneurysm has ruptured can include: Sudden, intense and persistent abdominal or back pain, which can be described as a tearing sensation, Low blood pressure, Fast pulse.
Aortic aneurysms also put you at risk of developing blood clots in the area. If a blood clot breaks loose from the inside wall of an aneurysm and blocks a blood vessel elsewhere in your body, it can cause pain or block the blood flow to the legs, toes, kidneys or abdominal organs.
An indication of simple absence seizure is a vacant stare, which may be mistaken for a lapse in attention that lasts about 10 seconds, though it may last as long as 20 seconds, without any confusion, headache or drowsiness afterward. Signs and symptoms of absence seizures include: Sudden stop in motion without falling, Lip smacking, Eyelid flutters, Chewing motions, Finger rubbing, Small movements of both hands.
Afterward, there's no memory of the incident. Some people have many episodes daily, which interfere with school or daily activities.
A child may have absence seizures for some time before an adult notices the seizures, because they're so brief. A decline in a child's learning ability may be the first sign of this disorder. Teachers may comment about a child's inability to pay attention or that a child is often daydreaming.
Contact your doctor: The first time you notice a seizure, If this is a new type of seizure, If the seizures continue to occur despite taking anti-seizure medication.
Contact 911 or emergency services in your area: If you observe prolonged automatic behaviors lasting minutes to hours — activities such as eating or moving without awareness — or prolonged confusion, possible symptoms of a condition called absence status epilepticus, After any seizure lasting more than five minutes.
Many children appear to have a genetic predisposition to absence seizures.
In general, seizures are caused by abnormal electrical impulses from nerve cells (neurons) in the brain. The brain's nerve cells normally send electrical and chemical signals across the synapses that connect them.
In people who have seizures, the brain's usual electrical activity is altered. During an absence seizure, these electrical signals repeat themselves over and over in a three-second pattern.
People who have seizures may also have altered levels of the chemical messengers that help the nerve cells communicate with one another (neurotransmitters).
Certain factors are common to children who have absence seizures, including:
Age. Absence seizures are more common in children between the ages of 4 and 14.
Sex. Absence seizures are more common in girls.
Family members who have seizures. Nearly half of children with absence seizures have a close relative who has seizures.
While most children outgrow absence seizures, some: Must take anti-seizure medications throughout life to prevent seizures, Eventually have full convulsions, such as generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
Other complications can include: Learning difficulties, Behavior problems, Social isolation.
Skin changes are the only signs of acanthosis nigricans. You'll notice dark, thickened, velvety skin in body folds and creases — typically in your armpits, groin and back of the neck. The skin changes usually appear slowly. The affected skin may also have an odor or itch.
Consult your doctor if you notice changes in your skin — especially if the changes appear suddenly. You may have an underlying condition that needs treatment.
Acanthosis nigricans has been associated with:
Insulin resistance. Most people who have acanthosis nigricans have also become resistant to insulin. Insulin is a hormone secreted by the pancreas that allows your body to process sugar. Insulin resistance is what eventually causes type 2 diabetes.
Hormonal disorders. Acanthosis nigricans often occurs in people who have disorders such as ovarian cysts, underactive thyroids or problems with the adrenal glands.
Certain drugs and supplements. High-dose niacin, birth control pills, prednisone and other corticosteroids may cause acanthosis nigricans.
Cancer. Acanthosis nigricans also sometimes occurs with lymphoma or when a cancerous tumor begins growing in an internal organ, such as the stomach, colon or liver.
Acanthosis nigricans risk factors include:
Obesity. The heavier you are, the higher your risk of acanthosis nigricans.
Race. Studies show that in the United States, acanthosis nigricans is more common among Native Americans.
Family history. Some types of acanthosis nigricans appear to be hereditary.
People who have acanthosis nigricans are much more likely to develop type 2 diabetes.
Achalasia symptoms generally appear gradually and worsen over time. Signs and symptoms may include: Inability to swallow (dysphagia), which may feel like food or drink is stuck in your throat, Regurgitating food or saliva, Heartburn, Belching, Chest pain that comes and goes, Coughing at night, Pneumonia (from aspiration of food into the lungs), Weight loss, Vomiting.
The pain associated with Achilles tendinitis typically begins as a mild ache in the back of the leg or above the heel after running or other sports activity. Episodes of more-severe pain may occur after prolonged running, stair climbing or sprinting.
You might also experience tenderness or stiffness, especially in the morning, which usually improves with mild activity.
If you experience persistent pain around the Achilles tendon, call your doctor. Seek immediate medical attention if the pain or disability is severe. You may have a torn (ruptured) Achilles tendon.
Achilles tendinitis is caused by repetitive or intense strain on the Achilles tendon, the band of tissue that connects your calf muscles to your heel bone. This tendon is used when you walk, run, jump or push up on your toes.
The structure of the Achilles tendon weakens with age, which can make it more susceptible to injury — particularly in people who may participate in sports only on the weekends or who have suddenly increased the intensity of their running programs.
A number of factors may increase your risk of Achilles tendinitis, including:
Your sex. Achilles tendinitis occurs most commonly in men.
Age. Achilles tendinitis is more common as you age.
Physical problems. A naturally flat arch in your foot can put more strain on the Achilles tendon. Obesity and tight calf muscles also can increase tendon strain.
Training choices. Running in worn-out shoes can increase your risk of Achilles tendinitis. Tendon pain occurs more frequently in cold weather than in warm weather, and running on hilly terrain also can predispose you to Achilles injury.
Medical conditions. People who have psoriasis or high blood pressure are at higher risk of developing Achilles tendinitis.
Medications. Certain types of antibiotics, called fluoroquinolones, have been associated with higher rates of Achilles tendinitis.
Achilles tendinitis can weaken the tendon, making it more vulnerable to a tear (rupture) — a painful injury that usually requires surgical repair.
Although it's possible to have no signs or symptoms with an Achilles tendon rupture, most people have: The feeling of having been kicked in the calf, Pain, possibly severe, and swelling near the heel, An inability to bend the foot downward or "push off" the injured leg when walking, An inability to stand on the toes on the injured leg, A popping or snapping sound when the injury occurs.
Seek medical advice immediately if you hear a pop in your heel, especially if you can't walk properly afterward.
Your Achilles tendon helps you point your foot downward, rise on your toes and push off your foot as you walk. You rely on it virtually every time you walk and move your foot.
Rupture usually occurs in the section of the tendon situated within 2 1/2 inches (about 6 centimeters) of the point where it attaches to the heel bone. This section might be prone to rupture because blood flow is poor, which also can impair its ability to heal.
Ruptures often are caused by a sudden increase in the stress on your Achilles tendon. Common examples include: Increasing the intensity of sports participation, especially in sports that involve jumping, Falling from a height, Stepping into a hole.
Factors that may increase your risk of Achilles tendon rupture include:
Age. The peak age for Achilles tendon rupture is 30 to 40.
Sex. Achilles tendon rupture is up to five times more likely to occur in men than in women.
Recreational sports. Achilles tendon injuries occur more often during sports that involve running, jumping, and sudden starts and stops — such as soccer, basketball and tennis.
Steroid injections. Doctors sometimes inject steroids into an ankle joint to reduce pain and inflammation. However, this medication can weaken nearby tendons and has been associated with Achilles tendon ruptures.
Certain antibiotics. Fluoroquinolone antibiotics, such as ciprofloxacin (Cipro) or levofloxacin (Levaquin), increase the risk of Achilles tendon rupture.
Obesity. Excess weight puts more strain on the tendon.
Signs and symptoms of an ACL injury usually include: A loud "pop" or a "popping" sensation in the knee, Severe pain and inability to continue activity, Rapid swelling, Loss of range of motion, A feeling of instability or "giving way" with weight bearing.
Seek immediate care if any injury to your knee causes signs or symptoms of an ACL injury. The knee joint is a complex structure of bones, ligaments, tendons and other tissues that work together. It's important to get a prompt and accurate diagnosis to determine the severity of the injury and get proper treatment.
Ligaments are strong bands of tissue that connect one bone to another. The ACL, one of two ligaments that cross in the middle of the knee, connects your thighbone (femur) to your shinbone (tibia) and helps stabilize your knee joint.
ACL injuries often happen during sports and fitness activities that can put stress on the knee: Suddenly slowing down and changing direction (cutting), Pivoting with your foot firmly planted, Landing awkwardly from a jump, Stopping suddenly, Receiving a direct blow to the knee or collision, such as a football tackle.
When the ligament is damaged, there is usually a partial or complete tear of the tissue. A mild injury may stretch the ligament but leave it intact.
There are a number of factors that increase your risk of an ACL injury, including: Being female — possibly due to differences in anatomy, muscle strength and hormonal influences, Participating in certain sports, such as soccer, football, basketball, gymnastics and downhill skiing, Poor conditioning, Wearing footwear that doesn't fit properly, Using poorly maintained sports equipment, such as ski bindings that aren't adjusted properly, Playing on artificial turf surfaces.
People who experience an ACL injury are at higher risk of developing osteoarthritis in the knee. Arthritis may occur even if you have surgery to reconstruct the ligament.
Multiple factors likely influence the risk of arthritis, such as the severity of the original injury, the presence of related injuries in the knee joint or the level of activity after treatment.
Acne signs vary depending on the severity of your condition: Whiteheads (closed plugged pores), Blackheads (open plugged pores), Small red, tender bumps (papules), Pimples (pustules), which are papules with pus at their tips, Large, solid, painful lumps under the skin (nodules), Painful, pus-filled lumps under the skin (cystic lesions).
Acne usually appears on the face, forehead, chest, upper back and shoulders.
If self-care remedies don't clear your acne, see your primary care doctor. He or she can prescribe stronger medications. If acne persists or is severe, you may want to seek medical treatment from a doctor who specializes in the skin (dermatologist or pediatric dermatologist).
For many women, acne can persist for decades, with flares common a week before menstruation. This type of acne tends to clear up without treatment in women who use contraceptives.
In older adults, a sudden onset of severe acne may signal an underlying disease requiring medical attention.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) warns that some popular nonprescription acne lotions, cleansers and other skin products can cause a serious reaction. This type of reaction is quite rare, so don't confuse it with any redness, irritation or itchiness that occurs in areas where you've applied medications or products.
Seek emergency medical help if after using a skin product you experience: Faintness, Difficulty breathing, Swelling of the eyes, face, lips or tongue, Tightness of the throat.
Four main factors cause acne: Excess oil (sebum) production, Hair follicles clogged by oil and dead skin cells, Bacteria, Inflammation.
Acne typically appears on your face, forehead, chest, upper back and shoulders because these areas of skin have the most oil (sebaceous) glands. Hair follicles are connected to oil glands.
The follicle wall may bulge and produce a whitehead. Or the plug may be open to the surface and darken, causing a blackhead. A blackhead may look like dirt stuck in pores. But actually the pore is congested with bacteria and oil, which turns brown when it's exposed to the air.
Pimples are raised red spots with a white center that develop when blocked hair follicles become inflamed or infected with bacteria. Blockages and inflammation deep inside hair follicles produce cystlike lumps beneath the surface of your skin. Other pores in your skin, which are the openings of the sweat glands, aren't usually involved in acne.
Certain things may trigger or worsen acne:
Hormonal changes. Androgens are hormones that increase in boys and girls during puberty and cause the sebaceous glands to enlarge and make more sebum. Hormone changes during midlife, particularly in women, can lead to breakouts too.
Certain medications. Examples include drugs containing corticosteroids, testosterone or lithium.
Diet. Studies indicate that consuming certain foods — including carbohydrate-rich foods, such as bread, bagels and chips — may worsen acne. Further study is needed to examine whether people with acne would benefit from following specific dietary restrictions.
Stress. Stress doesn't cause acne, but if you have acne already, stress may make it worse.
These factors have little effect on acne:
Chocolate and greasy foods. Eating chocolate or greasy food has little to no effect on acne.
Hygiene. Acne isn't caused by dirty skin. In fact, scrubbing the skin too hard or cleansing with harsh soaps or chemicals irritates the skin and can make acne worse.
Cosmetics. Cosmetics don't necessarily worsen acne, especially if you use oil-free makeup that doesn't clog pores (noncomedogenics) and remove makeup regularly. Nonoily cosmetics don't interfere with the effectiveness of acne drugs.
People with darker skin types are more likely than are people with lighter skin to experience these acne complications:
Scars. Pitted skin (acne scars) and thick scars (keloids) can remain long-term after acne has healed.
Skin changes. After acne has cleared, the affected skin may be darker (hyperpigmented) or lighter (hypopigmented) than before the condition occurred.
Risk factors for acne include:
Age. People of all ages can get acne, but it's most common in teenagers.
Hormonal changes. Such changes are common during puberty or pregnancy.
Family history. Genetics plays a role in acne. If both of your parents had acne, you're likely to develop it too.
Greasy or oily substances. You may develop acne where your skin comes into contact with oil or oily lotions and creams.
Friction or pressure on your skin. This can be caused by items such as telephones, cellphones, helmets, tight collars and backpacks.
Signs and symptoms of acoustic neuroma are often subtle and may take many years to develop. They usually arise from the tumor's effects on the hearing and balance nerves. Pressure from the tumor on adjacent nerves controlling facial muscles and sensation (facial and trigeminal nerves), nearby blood vessels, or brain structures may also cause problems.
As the tumor grows, it may be more likely to cause more noticeable or severe signs and symptoms.
Common signs and symptoms of acoustic neuroma include: Hearing loss, usually gradual — although in some cases sudden — and occurring on only one side or more pronounced on one side, Ringing (tinnitus) in the affected ear, Unsteadiness, loss of balance, Dizziness (vertigo), Facial numbness and very rarely, weakness or loss of muscle movement.
In rare cases, an acoustic neuroma may grow large enough to compress the brainstem and become life-threatening.
See your doctor if you notice hearing loss in one ear, ringing in your ear or trouble with your balance.
Early diagnosis of an acoustic neuroma may help keep the tumor from growing large enough to cause serious consequences, such as total hearing loss or a life-threatening buildup of fluid within your skull.
The cause of acoustic neuromas appears to be a malfunctioning gene on chromosome 22. Normally, this gene produces a tumor suppressor protein that helps control the growth of Schwann cells covering the nerves.
What makes this gene malfunction isn't clear, and in most cases of acoustic neuroma, there is no identifiable cause. This faulty gene is also inherited in neurofibromatosis type 2, a rare disorder that usually involves the growth of tumors on balance nerves on both sides of your head (bilateral vestibular schwannomas).
The only confirmed risk factor for acoustic neuroma is having a parent with the rare genetic disorder neurofibromatosis type 2. But neurofibromatosis type 2 only accounts for about 5 percent of acoustic neuroma cases.
A hallmark characteristic of neurofibromatosis type 2 is the development of noncancerous tumors on the balance nerves on both sides of your head, as well as on other nerves.
Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is known as an autosomal dominant disorder, meaning that the mutation can be passed on by just one parent (dominant gene). Each child of an affected parent has a 50-50 chance of inheriting it.
An acoustic neuroma may cause a variety of permanent complications, including: Hearing loss, Facial numbness and weakness, Difficulties with balance, Ringing in the ear.
Large tumors may press on your brainstem, preventing the normal flow of fluid between your brain and spinal cord (cerebrospinal fluid). In this case, fluid can build up in your head (hydrocephalus), increasing the pressure inside your skull.
A common sign of acromegaly is enlarged hands and feet. People with this disorder often notice that they aren't able to put on rings that used to fit and that their shoe size has progressively increased.
Acromegaly may also cause gradual changes in the shape of your face, such as a protruding lower jaw and brow, an enlarged nose, thickened lips, and wider spacing between your teeth.
Because acromegaly tends to progress slowly, early signs may not be obvious for years. Sometimes, people notice the condition only by comparing old photographs with newer ones.
Acromegaly may produce the following signs and symptoms, which can vary from one person to another: Enlarged hands and feet, Coarsened, enlarged facial features, Coarse, oily, thickened skin, Excessive sweating and body odor, Small outgrowths of skin tissue (skin tags), Fatigue and muscle weakness, A deepened, husky voice due to enlarged vocal cords and sinuses, Severe snoring due to obstruction of the upper airway, Impaired vision, Headaches, Enlarged tongue, Pain and limited joint mobility, Menstrual cycle irregularities in women, Erectile dysfunction in men, Enlarged organs, such as the heart, Loss of interest in sex.
If you have signs and symptoms associated with acromegaly, contact your doctor for an evaluation.
Acromegaly usually develops slowly. Even your family members may not initially notice the gradual physical changes that occur with this disorder, but early diagnosis is important so that you can start getting proper care. Acromegaly can lead to serious complications if it's not treated.
Acromegaly is caused by the pituitary gland overproducing growth hormone (GH) over time. The pituitary gland, a small gland situated at the base of your brain behind the bridge of your nose, produces a number of hormones. GH plays an important role in managing your physical growth.
When GH is secreted into your bloodstream, it triggers your liver to produce a hormone called insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I). In turn, IGF-I stimulates the growth of bones and other tissues.
If your pituitary gland makes too much GH, excessive amounts of IGF-I can result. Too much IGF-I can cause abnormal growth of your soft tissues and skeleton and other signs and symptoms characteristic of acromegaly and gigantism.
In adults, a tumor is the most common cause of too much GH production:
Pituitary tumors. Most cases of acromegaly are caused by a noncancerous (benign) tumor (adenoma) of the pituitary gland. The tumor secretes excessive amounts of growth hormone, causing many of the signs and symptoms of acromegaly. Some of the symptoms of acromegaly, such as headaches and impaired vision, are due to the tumor mass pressing on nearby brain tissues.
Nonpituitary tumors. In a few people with acromegaly, tumors in other parts of the body, such as the lungs or pancreas, cause the disorder. Sometimes, these tumors secrete GH. In other cases, the tumors produce a hormone called growth hormone-releasing hormone (GH-RH), which stimulates the pituitary gland to make more GH.
Progression of acromegaly can result in major health problems. Complications may include: High blood pressure (hypertension), Cardiovascular disease, particularly enlargement of the heart (cardiomyopathy), Osteoarthritis, Diabetes mellitus, Goiter, Precancerous growths (polyps) on the lining of your colon, Sleep apnea, a condition in which breathing repeatedly stops and starts during sleep, Carpal tunnel syndrome, Spinal cord compression, Vision loss.
Early treatment of acromegaly can prevent these complications from developing or becoming worse. Untreated, acromegaly and its complications can lead to premature death.
The signs and symptoms of an actinic keratosis include: Rough, dry or scaly patch of skin, usually less than 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) in diameter, Flat to slightly raised patch or bump on the top layer of skin, In some cases, a hard, wartlike surface, Color as varied as pink, red or brown, Itching or burning in the affected area.
Actinic keratoses are found primarily on areas exposed to the sun, such as your face, lips, ears, hands, forearms, scalp and neck.
It can be difficult to distinguish between noncancerous spots and cancerous ones. So it's best to have new skin changes evaluated by a doctor — especially if a spot or lesion persists, grows or bleeds.
An actinic keratosis is caused by frequent or intense exposure to UV rays from the sun or tanning beds.
Anyone can develop actinic keratoses. But you may be more likely to develop the condition if you: Are older than 40, Live in a sunny place, Have a history of frequent or intense sun exposure or sunburn, Have red or blond hair, and blue or light-colored eyes, Tend to freckle or burn when exposed to sunlight, Have a personal history of an actinic keratosis or skin cancer, Have a weak immune system as a result of chemotherapy, leukemia, AIDS or organ transplant medications.
If treated early, almost all actinic keratoses can be cleared up or removed before they develop into skin cancer. If left untreated, some of these spots may progress to squamous cell carcinoma — a type of cancer that usually isn't life-threatening if detected and treated early.
The signs and symptoms of acute coronary syndrome usually begin abruptly. They include: Chest pain (angina) or discomfort, often described as aching, pressure, tightness or burning, Pain spreading from the chest to the shoulders, arms, upper abdomen, back, neck or jaw, Nausea or vomiting, Indigestion, Shortness of breath (dyspnea), Sudden, heavy sweating (diaphoresis), Lightheadedness, dizziness or fainting, Unusual or unexplained fatigue, Feeling restless or apprehensive.
Chest pain or discomfort is the most common symptom. However, signs and symptoms may vary significantly depending on your age, sex and other medical conditions. You're more likely to have signs and symptoms without chest pain or discomfort if you're a woman, older adult or have diabetes.
Acute coronary syndrome is a medical emergency. Chest pain or discomfort can be a sign of any number of serious, life-threatening conditions. Get emergency help for a prompt diagnosis and appropriate care. Do not drive yourself to the hospital.
Acute coronary syndrome usually results from the buildup of fatty deposits (plaques) in and on the walls of coronary arteries, the blood vessels delivering oxygen and nutrients to heart muscles.
When a plaque deposit ruptures or splits, a blood clot forms. This clot blocks the flow of blood to heart muscles.
When the supply of oxygen to cells is too low, cells of the heart muscles can die. The death of cells — resulting in damage to muscle tissues — is a heart attack (myocardial infarction).
Even when there is no cell death, the decrease in oxygen still results in heart muscles that don't work the way they should. This change may be temporary or permanent. When acute coronary syndrome doesn't result in cell death, it is called unstable angina.
The risk factors for acute coronary syndrome are the same as those for other types of heart disease. Acute coronary syndrome risk factors include: Aging, High blood pressure, High blood cholesterol, Cigarette smoking, Lack of physical activity, Unhealthy diet, Obesity or overweight, Diabetes, Family history of chest pain, heart disease or stroke, History of high blood pressure, preeclampsia or diabetes during pregnancy, COVID-19 infection.
The most common signs and symptoms of acute flaccid myelitis include: Sudden arm or leg weakness, Sudden loss of muscle tone, Sudden loss of reflexes.
Other possible signs and symptoms include: Difficulty moving the eyes or drooping eyelids, Facial droop or weakness, Difficulty with swallowing or slurred speech, Pain in the arms, legs, neck or back.
Uncommon symptoms might include: Numbness or tingling, Inability to pass urine.
Severe symptoms involve respiratory failure, due to the muscles involved in breathing becoming weak. It's also possible to experience life-threatening body temperature changes and blood pressure instability.
If you or your child has any of the signs or symptoms listed above, seek medical care as soon as possible.
Acute flaccid myelitis might be caused by an infection with a type of virus known as an enterovirus. Respiratory illnesses and fever from enteroviruses are common — especially in children. Most people recover. It's not clear why some people with an enterovirus infection develop acute flaccid myelitis.
In the United States many viruses, including enteroviruses, circulate between August and November. This is when acute flaccid myelitis outbreaks tend to occur.
The symptoms of acute flaccid myelitis can look similar to those of the viral disease polio. But none of the acute flaccid myelitis cases in the United States have been caused by poliovirus.
Acute flaccid myelitis mainly affects young children.
Muscle weakness caused by acute flaccid myelitis can continue for months to years.
Signs and symptoms of acute kidney failure may include: Decreased urine output, although occasionally urine output remains normal, Fluid retention, causing swelling in your legs, ankles or feet, Shortness of breath, Fatigue, Confusion, Nausea, Weakness, Irregular heartbeat, Chest pain or pressure, Seizures or coma in severe cases.
Sometimes acute kidney failure causes no signs or symptoms and is detected through lab tests done for another reason.
See your doctor immediately or seek emergency care if you have signs or symptoms of acute kidney failure.
Acute kidney failure can occur when: You have a condition that slows blood flow to your kidneys, You experience direct damage to your kidneys, Your kidneys' urine drainage tubes (ureters) become blocked and wastes can't leave your body through your urine.
Diseases and conditions that may slow blood flow to the kidneys and lead to kidney injury include: Blood or fluid loss, Blood pressure medications, Heart attack, Heart disease, Infection, Liver failure, Use of aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen sodium (Aleve, others) or related drugs, Severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis), Severe burns, Severe dehydration.
These diseases, conditions and agents may damage the kidneys and lead to acute kidney failure: Blood clots in the veins and arteries in and around the kidneys, Cholesterol deposits that block blood flow in the kidneys, Glomerulonephritis (gloe-mer-u-loe-nuh-FRY-tis), inflammation of the tiny filters in the kidneys (glomeruli), Hemolytic uremic syndrome, a condition that results from premature destruction of red blood cells, Infection, such as with the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), Lupus, an immune system disorder causing glomerulonephritis, Medications, such as certain chemotherapy drugs, antibiotics and dyes used during imaging tests, Scleroderma, a group of rare diseases affecting the skin and connective tissues, Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, a rare blood disorder, Toxins, such as alcohol, heavy metals and cocaine, Muscle tissue breakdown (rhabdomyolysis) that leads to kidney damage caused by toxins from muscle tissue destruction, Breakdown of tumor cells (tumor lysis syndrome), which leads to the release of toxins that can cause kidney injury.
Diseases and conditions that block the passage of urine out of the body (urinary obstructions) and can lead to acute kidney injury include: Bladder cancer, Blood clots in the urinary tract, Cervical cancer, Colon cancer, Enlarged prostate, Kidney stones, Nerve damage involving the nerves that control the bladder, Prostate cancer.
Acute kidney failure almost always occurs in connection with another medical condition or event. Conditions that can increase your risk of acute kidney failure include: Being hospitalized, especially for a serious condition that requires intensive care, Advanced age, Blockages in the blood vessels in your arms or legs (peripheral artery disease), Diabetes, High blood pressure, Heart failure, Kidney diseases, Liver diseases, Certain cancers and their treatments.
Potential complications of acute kidney failure include:
Fluid buildup. Acute kidney failure may lead to a buildup of fluid in your lungs, which can cause shortness of breath.
Chest pain. If the lining that covers your heart (pericardium) becomes inflamed, you may experience chest pain.
Muscle weakness. When your body's fluids and electrolytes — your body's blood chemistry — are out of balance, muscle weakness can result.
Permanent kidney damage. Occasionally, acute kidney failure causes permanent loss of kidney function, or end-stage renal disease. People with end-stage renal disease require either permanent dialysis — a mechanical filtration process used to remove toxins and wastes from the body — or a kidney transplant to survive.
Death. Acute kidney failure can lead to loss of kidney function and, ultimately, death.
Signs and symptoms of acute liver failure may include: Yellowing of your skin and eyeballs (jaundice), Pain in your upper right abdomen, Abdominal swelling (ascites), Nausea, Vomiting, A general sense of feeling unwell (malaise), Disorientation or confusion, Sleepiness, Breath may have a musty or sweet odor, Tremors.
Acute liver failure can develop quickly in an otherwise healthy person, and it is life-threatening. If you or someone you know suddenly develops a yellowing of the eyes or skin; tenderness in the upper abdomen; or any unusual changes in mental state, personality or behavior, seek medical attention right away.
Acute liver failure occurs when liver cells are damaged significantly and are no longer able to function. Potential causes include:
Acetaminophen overdose. Taking too much acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) is the most common cause of acute liver failure in the United States. Outside of the United States, acetaminophen is known as paracetamol. Acute liver failure can occur after one very large dose of acetaminophen, or after higher than recommended doses every day for several days.
If you or someone you know has taken an overdose of acetaminophen, seek medical attention as quickly as possible. Treatment may prevent liver failure. Don't wait for the signs of liver failure.
Prescription medications. Some prescription medications, including antibiotics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and anticonvulsants, can cause acute liver failure.
Herbal supplements. Herbal drugs and supplements, including kava, ephedra, skullcap and pennyroyal, have been linked to acute liver failure.
Hepatitis and other viruses. Hepatitis A, hepatitis B and hepatitis E can cause acute liver failure. Other viruses that can cause acute liver failure include Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus.
Toxins. Toxins that can cause acute liver failure include the poisonous wild mushroom Amanita phalloides, which is sometimes mistaken for one that is safe to eat. Carbon tetrachloride is another toxin that can cause acute liver failure. It is an industrial chemical found in refrigerants and solvents for waxes, varnishes and other materials.
Autoimmune disease. Liver failure can be caused by autoimmune hepatitis — a disease in which your immune system attacks liver cells, causing inflammation and injury.
Diseases of the veins in the liver. Vascular diseases, such as Budd-Chiari syndrome, can cause blockages in the veins of the liver and lead to acute liver failure.
Metabolic disease. Rare metabolic diseases, such as Wilson's disease and acute fatty liver of pregnancy, infrequently cause acute liver failure.
Cancer. Cancer that either begins in or spreads to your liver can cause your liver to fail.
Shock. Overwhelming infection (sepsis) and shock can severely impair blood flow to the liver, causing liver failure.
Heat stroke. Extreme physical activity in a hot environment can trigger acute liver failure.
Some cases of acute liver failure have no apparent cause.
Acute liver failure often causes complications, including:
Excessive fluid in the brain (cerebral edema). Too much fluid causes pressure to build up in your brain, which can lead to disorientation, severe mental confusion and seizures.
Bleeding and bleeding disorders. A failing liver cannot make enough clotting factors, which help blood to clot. Bleeding in the gastrointestinal tract is common with this condition. It may be difficult to control.
Infections. People with acute liver failure are more likely to develop infections, particularly in the blood and in the respiratory and urinary tracts.
Kidney failure. Kidney failure often occurs after liver failure, especially if you had an acetaminophen overdose, which damages both your liver and your kidneys.
Signs and symptoms of acute lymphocytic leukemia may include: Bleeding from the gums, Bone pain, Fever, Frequent infections, Frequent or severe nosebleeds, Lumps caused by swollen lymph nodes in and around the neck, underarm, abdomen or groin, Pale skin, Shortness of breath, Weakness, fatigue or a general decrease in energy.
Make an appointment with your doctor or your child's doctor if you notice any persistent signs and symptoms that concern you.
Many signs and symptoms of acute lymphocytic leukemia mimic those of the flu. However, flu signs and symptoms eventually improve. If signs and symptoms don't improve as expected, make an appointment with your doctor.
Acute lymphocytic leukemia occurs when a bone marrow cell develops errors in its DNA. The errors tell the cell to continue growing and dividing, when a healthy cell would normally stop dividing and eventually die. When this happens, blood cell production becomes abnormal. The bone marrow produces immature cells that develop into leukemic white blood cells called lymphoblasts. These abnormal cells are unable to function properly, and they can build up and crowd out healthy cells.
It's not clear what causes the DNA mutations that can lead to acute lymphocytic leukemia. But doctors have found that most cases of acute lymphocytic leukemia aren't inherited.
Factors that may increase the risk of acute lymphocytic leukemia include:
Previous cancer treatment. Children and adults who've had certain types of chemotherapy and radiation therapy for other kinds of cancer may have an increased risk of developing acute lymphocytic leukemia.
Exposure to radiation. People exposed to very high levels of radiation, such as survivors of a nuclear reactor accident, have an increased risk of developing acute lymphocytic leukemia.
Genetic disorders. Certain genetic disorders, such as Down syndrome, are associated with an increased risk of acute lymphocytic leukemia.
Having a brother or sister with ALL. People who have a sibling, including a twin, with acute lymphocytic leukemia have an increased risk of ALL.
General signs and symptoms of the early stages of acute myelogenous leukemia may mimic those of the flu or other common diseases. Signs and symptoms may vary based on the type of blood cell affected.
Signs and symptoms of acute myelogenous leukemia include: Fever, Bone pain, Lethargy and fatigue, Shortness of breath, Pale skin, Frequent infections, Easy bruising, Unusual bleeding, such as frequent nosebleeds and bleeding from the gums.
Make an appointment with a doctor if you develop any signs or symptoms that seem unusual or that worry you.
Acute myelogenous leukemia is caused by damage to the DNA of developing cells in your bone marrow. When this happens, blood cell production goes wrong. The bone marrow produces immature cells that develop into leukemic white blood cells called myeloblasts. These abnormal cells are unable to function properly, and they can build up and crowd out healthy cells.
In most cases, it's not clear what causes the DNA mutations that lead to leukemia. Radiation, exposure to certain chemicals and some chemotherapy drugs are known risk factors for acute myelogenous leukemia.
Factors that may increase your risk of acute myelogenous leukemia include:
Increasing age. The risk of acute myelogenous leukemia increases with age. Acute myelogenous leukemia is most common in adults age 65 and older.
Your sex. Men are more likely to develop acute myelogenous leukemia than are women.
Previous cancer treatment. People who've had certain types of chemotherapy and radiation therapy may have a greater risk of developing AML.
Exposure to radiation. People exposed to very high levels of radiation, such as survivors of a nuclear reactor accident, have an increased risk of developing AML.
Dangerous chemical exposure. Exposure to certain chemicals, such as benzene, is linked to a greater risk of AML.
Smoking. AML is linked to cigarette smoke, which contains benzene and other known cancer-causing chemicals.
Other blood disorders. People who've had another blood disorder, such as myelodysplasia, myelofibrosis, polycythemia vera or thrombocythemia, are at greater risk of developing AML.
Genetic disorders. Certain genetic disorders, such as Down syndrome, are associated with an increased risk of AML.
Many people with AML have no known risk factors, and many people who have risk factors never develop the cancer.
Acute sinusitis symptoms often include: Thick, yellow or greenish discharge from the nose or down the back of the throat (postnasal drainage), Nasal blockage or congestion, causing difficulty breathing through your nose, Pain, tenderness, swelling and pressure around your eyes, cheeks, nose or forehead that worsens when bending over.
Other signs and symptoms include: Ear pressure, Headache, Aching in your teeth, Altered sense of smell, Cough, Bad breath, Fatigue, Fever.
Most people with acute sinusitis don't need to see a doctor.
Contact your doctor if you have any of the following: Symptoms that last more than a week or so, Symptoms that worsen after seeming to improve, A persistent fever, A history of recurrent or chronic sinusitis.
See a doctor immediately if you have signs or symptoms that may indicate a serious infection: Pain, swelling or redness around your eyes, High fever, Confusion, Double vision or other vision changes, Stiff neck.
Acute sinusitis is most often caused by the common cold, which is a viral infection. In some cases, a bacterial infection develops.
You may be at increased risk of getting sinusitis if you have: Hay fever or another allergic condition that affects your sinuses, A nasal passage abnormality, such as a deviated nasal septum, nasal polyps or tumors, A medical condition such as cystic fibrosis or an immune system disorder such as HIV/AIDS, Exposure to smoke, either from smoking or through secondhand smoke exposure.
Acute sinusitis complications are uncommon, and serious complications are rare. If they occur, complications might include:
Chronic sinusitis. Acute sinusitis may be a flare-up of a long-term problem known as chronic sinusitis. Chronic sinusitis lasts longer than 12 weeks.
Meningitis. This infection causes inflammation of the membranes and fluid surrounding your brain and spinal cord.
Other infections. Uncommonly, an infection can spread to the bones (osteomyelitis) or skin (cellulitis).
Vision problems. If the infection spreads to your eye socket, it can cause reduced vision or even blindness that can be permanent.
Addison's disease symptoms usually develop slowly, often over several months. Often, the disease progresses so slowly that symptoms are ignored until a stress, such as illness or injury, occurs and makes symptoms worse. Signs and symptoms may include: Extreme fatigue, Weight loss and decreased appetite, Darkening of your skin (hyperpigmentation), Low blood pressure, even fainting, Salt craving, Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), Nausea, diarrhea or vomiting (gastrointestinal symptoms), Abdominal pain, Muscle or joint pains, Irritability, Depression or other behavioral symptoms, Body hair loss or sexual dysfunction in women.
Sometimes the signs and symptoms of Addison's disease may appear suddenly. Acute adrenal failure (addisonian crisis) can lead to life-threatening shock. Seek emergency medical treatment if you experience the following signs and symptoms: Severe weakness, Confusion, Pain in your lower back or legs, Severe abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhea, leading to dehydration, Reduced consciousness or delirium.
In an addisonian crisis you will also have: Low blood pressure, High potassium (hyperkalemia) and low sodium (hyponatremia).
See your doctor if you have common signs and symptoms of Addison's disease, such as: Darkening areas of skin (hyperpigmentation), Severe fatigue, Unintentional weight loss, Gastrointestinal problems, such as nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain, Lightheadedness or fainting, Salt cravings, Muscle or joint pains.
Addison's disease is caused by damage to your adrenal glands, resulting in not enough of the hormone cortisol and, often, not enough aldosterone as well. Your adrenal glands are part of your endocrine system. They produce hormones that give instructions to virtually every organ and tissue in your body.
Your adrenal glands are composed of two sections. The interior (medulla) produces adrenaline-like hormones. The outer layer (cortex) produces a group of hormones called corticosteroids. Corticosteroids include:
Glucocorticoids. These hormones, which include cortisol, influence your body's ability to convert food into energy, play a role in your immune system's inflammatory response and help your body respond to stress.
Mineralocorticoids. These hormones, which include aldosterone, maintain your body's balance of sodium and potassium to keep your blood pressure normal.
Androgens. These male sex hormones are produced in small amounts by the adrenal glands in both men and women. They cause sexual development in men, and influence muscle mass, sex drive (libido) and a sense of well-being in both men and women.
When the cortex is damaged and doesn't produce enough adrenocortical hormones, the condition is called primary adrenal insufficiency. This is most commonly the result of the body attacking itself (autoimmune disease). For unknown reasons, your immune system views the adrenal cortex as foreign, something to attack and destroy. People with Addison's disease are more likely than others to have another autoimmune disease as well.
Other causes of adrenal gland failure may include: Tuberculosis, Other infections of the adrenal glands, Spread of cancer to the adrenal glands, Bleeding into the adrenal glands. In this case, you may have an addisonian crisis without any previous symptoms..
The pituitary gland makes a hormone called adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). ACTH in turn stimulates the adrenal cortex to produce its hormones. Benign pituitary tumors, inflammation and prior pituitary surgery are common causes of not producing enough pituitary hormone.
Too little ACTH can lead to too little of the glucocorticoids and androgens normally produced by your adrenal glands, even though your adrenal glands themselves aren't damaged. This is called secondary adrenal insufficiency. Mineralocorticoid production is not affected by too little ACTH.
Most symptoms of secondary adrenal insufficiency are similar to those of primary adrenal insufficiency. However, people with secondary adrenal insufficiency don't have hyperpigmentation and are less likely to have severe dehydration or low blood pressure. They're more likely to have low blood sugar.
A temporary cause of secondary adrenal insufficiency occurs when people who take corticosteroids (for example, prednisone) to treat chronic conditions, such as asthma or arthritis, stop taking the corticosteroids all at once rather than tapering off.
If you have untreated Addison's disease, you may develop an addisonian crisis as a result of physical stress, such as an injury, infection or illness. Normally, the adrenal glands produce two to three times the usual amount of cortisol in response to physical stress. With adrenal insufficiency, the inability to increase cortisol production with stress can lead to an addisonian crisis.
An addisonian crisis is a life-threatening situation that results in low blood pressure, low blood levels of sugar and high blood levels of potassium. You will need immediate medical care.
People with Addison's disease commonly have associated autoimmune diseases.
Sometimes, adenomyosis causes no signs or symptoms or only mild discomfort. However, adenomyosis can cause: Heavy or prolonged menstrual bleeding, Severe cramping or sharp, knifelike pelvic pain during menstruation (dysmenorrhea), Chronic pelvic pain, Painful intercourse (dyspareunia).
Your uterus might get bigger. Although you might not know if your uterus is bigger, you may notice tenderness or pressure in your lower abdomen.
If you have prolonged, heavy bleeding or severe cramping during your periods that interferes with your regular activities, make an appointment to see your doctor.
The cause of adenomyosis isn't known. There have been many theories, including:
Invasive tissue growth. Some experts believe that endometrial cells from the lining of the uterus invade the muscle that forms the uterine walls. Uterine incisions made during an operation such as a cesarean section (C-section) might promote the direct invasion of the endometrial cells into the wall of the uterus.
Developmental origins. Other experts suspect that endometrial tissue is deposited in the uterine muscle when the uterus is first formed in the fetus.
Uterine inflammation related to childbirth. Another theory suggests a link between adenomyosis and childbirth. Inflammation of the uterine lining during the postpartum period might cause a break in the normal boundary of cells that line the uterus.
Stem cell origins. A recent theory proposes that bone marrow stem cells might invade the uterine muscle, causing adenomyosis.
Regardless of how adenomyosis develops, its growth depends on the body's circulating estrogen.
Risk factors for adenomyosis include: Prior uterine surgery, such as C-section, fibroid removal, or dilatation and curettage (D&C), Childbirth, Middle age.
Most cases of adenomyosis — which depends on estrogen — are found in women in their 40s and 50s. Adenomyosis in these women could relate to longer exposure to estrogen compared with that of younger women. However, current research suggests that the condition might also be common in younger women.
If you often have prolonged, heavy bleeding during your periods, you can develop chronic anemia, which causes fatigue and other health problems.
Although not harmful, the pain and excessive bleeding associated with adenomyosis can disrupt your lifestyle. You might avoid activities you've enjoyed in the past because you're in pain or you worry that you might start bleeding.
Signs and symptoms depend on the type of adjustment disorder and can vary from person to person. You experience more stress than would normally be expected in response to a stressful event, and the stress causes significant problems in your life.
Adjustment disorders affect how you feel and think about yourself and the world and may also affect your actions or behavior. Some examples include: Feeling sad, hopeless or not enjoying things you used to enjoy, Frequent crying, Worrying or feeling anxious, nervous, jittery or stressed out, Trouble sleeping, Lack of appetite, Difficulty concentrating, Feeling overwhelmed, Difficulty functioning in daily activities, Withdrawing from social supports, Avoiding important things such as going to work or paying bills, Suicidal thoughts or behavior.
Symptoms of an adjustment disorder start within three months of a stressful event and last no longer than 6 months after the end of the stressful event. However, persistent or chronic adjustment disorders can continue for more than 6 months, especially if the stressor is ongoing, such as unemployment.
Usually stressors are temporary, and we learn to cope with them over time. Symptoms of adjustment disorder get better because the stress has eased. But sometimes the stressful event remains a part of your life. Or a new stressful situation comes up, and you face the same emotional struggles all over again.
Talk to your doctor if you continue to struggle or if you're having trouble getting through each day. You can get treatment to help you cope better with stressful events and feel better about life again.
If you have concerns about your child's adjustment or behavior, talk with your child's pediatrician.
If you have thoughts of hurting yourself or someone else, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately, go to an emergency room, or confide in a trusted relative or friend. Or call a suicide hotline number — in the United States, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) to reach a trained counselor.
Adjustment disorders are caused by significant changes or stressors in your life. Genetics, your life experiences, and your temperament may increase your likelihood of developing an adjustment disorder.
Some things may make you more likely to have an adjustment disorder.
Stressful life events — both positive and negative — may put you at risk of developing an adjustment disorder. For example: Divorce or marital problems, Relationship or interpersonal problems, Changes in situation, such as retirement, having a baby or going away to school, Adverse situations, such as losing a job, loss of a loved one or having financial issues, Problems in school or at work, Life-threatening experiences, such as physical assault, combat or natural disaster, Ongoing stressors, such as having a medical illness or living in a crime-ridden neighborhood.
Life experiences can impact how you cope with stress. For example, your risk of developing an adjustment disorder may be increased if you: Experienced significant stress in childhood, Have other mental health problems, Have a number of difficult life circumstances happening at the same time.
If adjustment disorders do not resolve, they can eventually lead to more serious mental health problems such as anxiety disorders, depression or substance abuse.
Signs and symptoms of adrenal cancer include: Weight gain, Muscle weakness, Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin, Hormone changes in women that might cause excess facial hair, hair loss on the head and irregular periods, Hormone changes in men that might cause enlarged breast tissue and shrinking testicles, Nausea, Vomiting, Abdominal bloating, Back pain, Fever, Loss of appetite, Loss of weight without trying.
It's not clear what causes adrenal cancer.
Adrenal cancer forms when something creates changes (mutations) in the DNA of an adrenal gland cell. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The mutations can tell the cell to multiply uncontrollably and to continue living when healthy cells would die. When this happens, the abnormal cells accumulate and form a tumor. The tumor cells can break away and spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.
Some people with ADHD have fewer symptoms as they age, but some adults continue to have major symptoms that interfere with daily functioning. In adults, the main features of ADHD may include difficulty paying attention, impulsiveness and restlessness. Symptoms can range from mild to severe.
Many adults with ADHD aren't aware they have it — they just know that everyday tasks can be a challenge. Adults with ADHD may find it difficult to focus and prioritize, leading to missed deadlines and forgotten meetings or social plans. The inability to control impulses can range from impatience waiting in line or driving in traffic to mood swings and outbursts of anger.
Adult ADHD symptoms may include: Impulsiveness, Disorganization and problems prioritizing, Poor time management skills, Problems focusing on a task, Trouble multitasking, Excessive activity or restlessness, Poor planning, Low frustration tolerance, Frequent mood swings, Problems following through and completing tasks, Hot temper, Trouble coping with stress.
Almost everyone has some symptoms similar to ADHD at some point in their lives. If your difficulties are recent or occurred only occasionally in the past, you probably don't have ADHD. ADHD is diagnosed only when symptoms are severe enough to cause ongoing problems in more than one area of your life. These persistent and disruptive symptoms can be traced back to early childhood.
Diagnosis of ADHD in adults can be difficult because certain ADHD symptoms are similar to those caused by other conditions, such as anxiety or mood disorders. And many adults with ADHD also have at least one other mental health condition, such as depression or anxiety.
If any of the symptoms listed above continually disrupt your life, talk to your doctor about whether you might have ADHD.
Different types of health care professionals may diagnose and supervise treatment for ADHD. Seek a provider who has training and experience in caring for adults with ADHD.
While the exact cause of ADHD is not clear, research efforts continue. Factors that may be involved in the development of ADHD include:
Genetics. ADHD can run in families, and studies indicate that genes may play a role.
Environment. Certain environmental factors also may increase risk, such as lead exposure as a child.
Problems during development. Problems with the central nervous system at key moments in development may play a role.
Risk of ADHD may increase if: You have blood relatives, such as a parent or sibling, with ADHD or another mental health disorder, Your mother smoked, drank alcohol or used drugs during pregnancy, As a child, you were exposed to environmental toxins — such as lead, found mainly in paint and pipes in older buildings, You were born prematurely.
Most people with adult Still's disease have a combination of the following signs and symptoms:
Fever. You might have a daily fever of at least 102 F (38.9 C) for a week or longer. The fever usually peaks in the late afternoon or early evening. You might have two fever spikes daily, with your temperature returning to normal in between.
Rash. A salmon-pink rash might come and go with the fever. The rash usually appears on your trunk, arms or legs.
Sore throat. This is one of the first symptoms of adult Still's disease. The lymph nodes in your neck might be swollen and tender.
Achy and swollen joints. Your joints — especially your knees and wrists — might be stiff, painful and inflamed. Ankles, elbows, hands and shoulders might also ache. The joint discomfort usually lasts at least two weeks.
Muscle pain. Muscular pain usually ebbs and flows with the fever, but the pain can be severe enough to disrupt your daily activities.
The signs and symptoms of this disorder can mimic those of other conditions, including lupus and a type of cancer called lymphoma.
If you have a high fever, rash and achy joints, see your doctor. Also, if you have adult Still's disease and develop a cough, difficulty breathing, chest pain or any other unusual symptoms, call your doctor.
It's not certain what causes adult Still's disease. Some researchers suspect the condition might be triggered by a viral or bacterial infection.
Age is the main risk factor for adult Still's disease, with incidence peaking twice: once from 15 to 25 years and again from 36 to 46 years. Males and females are equally at risk.
Most complications from adult Still's disease arise from chronic inflammation of organs and joints.
Joint destruction. Chronic inflammation can damage your joints. The most commonly involved joints are your knees and wrists. Your neck, foot, finger and hip joints also may be affected, but much less frequently.
Inflammation of your heart. Adult Still's disease can lead to an inflammation of the saclike covering of your heart (pericarditis) or of the muscular portion of your heart (myocarditis).
Excess fluid around your lungs. Inflammation may cause fluid to build up around your lungs, which can make it hard to breathe deeply.
Macrophage activation syndrome. This rare, but potentially fatal complication of adult Still's disease, can cause low blood cell counts, very high triglyceride levels and abnormal liver function.
Age spots may affect people of all skin types, but they're more common in adults with light skin. Unlike freckles, which are common in children and fade with no sun exposure, age spots don't fade.
Age spots: Are flat, oval areas of increased pigmentation, Are usually tan to dark brown, Occur on skin that has had the most sun exposure over the years, such as the backs of hands, tops of feet, face, shoulders and upper back, Range from freckle size to about 1/2 inch (13 millimeters) across, Can group together, making them more noticeable.
Age spots don't require medical care. Have your doctor look at spots that are black or have changed in appearance. These changes can be signs of melanoma, a serious form of skin cancer.
It's best to have any new skin changes evaluated by a doctor, especially if a spot: Is black, Is increasing in size, Has an irregular border, Has an unusual combination of colors, Is bleeding.
Age spots are caused by overactive pigment cells. Ultraviolet (UV) light speeds up the production of melanin, a natural pigment that gives skin its color. On skin that has had years of sun exposure, age spots appear when melanin becomes clumped or is produced in high concentrations.
Use of commercial tanning lamps and beds also can cause age spots.
You might be more likely to develop age spots if you: Have light skin, Have a history of frequent or intense sun exposure or sunburn.
Typical agoraphobia symptoms include fear of: Leaving home alone, Crowds or waiting in line, Enclosed spaces, such as movie theaters, elevators or small stores, Open spaces, such as parking lots, bridges or malls, Using public transportation, such as a bus, plane or train.
These situations cause anxiety because you fear you won't be able to escape or find help if you start to feel panicked or have other disabling or embarrassing symptoms.
In addition: Fear or anxiety almost always results from exposure to the situation, Your fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger of the situation, You avoid the situation, you need a companion to go with you, or you endure the situation but are extremely distressed, You experience significant distress or problems with social situations, work or other areas in your life because of the fear, anxiety or avoidance, Your phobia and avoidance usually lasts six months or longer.
Some people have a panic disorder in addition to agoraphobia. Panic disorder is a type of anxiety disorder in which you experience sudden attacks of extreme fear that reach a peak within a few minutes and trigger intense physical symptoms (panic attacks). You might think that you're totally losing control, having a heart attack or even dying.
Fear of another panic attack can lead to avoiding similar circumstances or the place where it occurred in an attempt to prevent future panic attacks.
Signs and symptoms of a panic attack can include: Rapid heart rate, Trouble breathing or a feeling of choking, Chest pain or pressure, Lightheadedness or dizziness, Feeling shaky, numb or tingling, Excessive sweating, Sudden flushing or chills, Upset stomach or diarrhea, Feeling a loss of control, Fear of dying.
Agoraphobia can severely limit your ability to socialize, work, attend important events and even manage the details of daily life, such as running errands.
Don't let agoraphobia make your world smaller. Call your doctor if you have signs or symptoms listed above.
Biology — including health conditions and genetics — temperament, environmental stress and learning experiences may all play a role in the development of agoraphobia.
Agoraphobia can begin in childhood, but usually starts in the late teen or early adult years — usually before age 35 — but older adults can also develop it. Women are diagnosed with agoraphobia more often than men are.
Risk factors for agoraphobia include: Having panic disorder or other phobias, Responding to panic attacks with excessive fear and avoidance, Experiencing stressful life events, such as abuse, the death of a parent or being attacked, Having an anxious or nervous temperament, Having a blood relative with agoraphobia.
Agoraphobia can greatly limit your life's activities. If your agoraphobia is severe, you may not even be able to leave your home. Without treatment, some people become housebound for years. You may not be able to visit with family and friends, go to school or work, run errands, or take part in other normal daily activities. You may become dependent on others for help.
Agoraphobia can also lead to or be associated with: Depression, Alcohol or drug abuse, Other mental health disorders, including other anxiety disorders or personality disorders.
Airplane ear can occur in one or both ears. Common signs and symptoms include: Moderate discomfort or pain in your ear, Feeling of fullness or stuffiness in your ear, Muffled hearing or slight to moderate hearing loss.
If airplane ear is severe, you might have: Severe pain, Increased ear pressure, Moderate to severe hearing loss, Ringing in your ear (tinnitus), Spinning sensation (vertigo), Bleeding from your ear.
If discomfort, fullness or muffled hearing lasts more than a few days, or if you have severe signs or symptoms, call your doctor.
Airplane ear occurs when the air pressure in the middle ear and the air pressure in the environment don't match, preventing your eardrum (tympanic membrane) from vibrating normally. A narrow passage called the eustachian tube, which is connected to the middle ear, regulates air pressure.
When an airplane climbs or descends, the air pressure changes rapidly. The eustachian tube often can't react fast enough, which causes the symptoms of airplane ear. Swallowing or yawning opens the eustachian tube and allows the middle ear to get more air, equalizing the air pressure.
Ear barotrauma can also be caused by: Scuba diving, Hyperbaric oxygen chambers, Explosions nearby, such as in a war zone.
You may also experience a minor case of barotrauma while riding an elevator in a tall building or driving in the mountains.
Any condition that blocks the eustachian tube or limits its function can increase the risk of airplane ear. Common risk factors include: A small eustachian tube, especially in infants and toddlers, The common cold, Sinus infection, Hay fever (allergic rhinitis), Middle ear infection (otitis media), Sleeping on an airplane during ascent and descent, because you can't yawn or swallow, which can equalize the pressure.
Airplane ear usually isn't serious and responds to self-care. Long-term complications can rarely occur when the condition is serious or prolonged or if there's damage to middle or inner ear structures.
Rare complications may include: Permanent hearing loss, Ongoing (chronic) tinnitus.
Signs and symptoms of albinism involve skin, hair, and eye color and vision.
The most recognizable form of albinism results in white hair and very light-colored skin compared with siblings. Skin coloring (pigmentation) and hair color can range from white to brown, and may be nearly the same as that of parents or siblings without albinism.
With exposure to the sun, some people may develop: Freckles, Moles, with or without pigment — moles without pigment are generally pink-colored, Large freckle-like spots (lentigines), Sunburn and the inability to tan.
For some people with albinism, skin pigmentation never changes. For others, melanin production may begin or increase during childhood and the teen years, resulting in slight changes in pigmentation.
Hair color can range from very white to brown. People of African or Asian descent who have albinism may have hair color that's yellow, reddish or brown. Hair color may also darken by early adulthood or stain from exposure to normal minerals in water and the environment, and appear darker with age.
Eyelashes and eyebrows are often pale. Eye color can range from very light blue to brown and may change with age.
The lack of pigment in the colored part of the eyes (irises) makes the irises somewhat translucent. This means that the irises can't completely block light from entering the eye. Because of this, very light-colored eyes may appear red in some lighting.
Vision impairment is a key feature of all types of albinism. Eye problems and issues may include: Rapid, involuntary back-and-forth movement of the eyes (nystagmus), Head movements, such as bobbing or tilting the head, to try to reduce the involuntary eye movements and see better, Inability of both eyes to stay directed at the same point or to move in unison (strabismus), Extreme nearsightedness or farsightedness, Sensitivity to light (photophobia), Abnormal curvature of the front surface of the eye or the lens inside the eye (astigmatism), which causes blurred vision, Abnormal development of the retina, resulting in reduced vision, Nerve signals from the retina to the brain that don't follow the usual nerve pathways (misrouting of the optic nerve), Poor depth perception, Legal blindness (vision less than 20/200) or complete blindness.
At your child's birth, if the doctor notices a lack of pigment in hair or skin that affects the eyelashes and eyebrows, the doctor will likely order an eye exam and closely follow any changes in your child's pigmentation and vision.
If you observe signs of albinism in your baby, talk to your doctor.
Contact your doctor if your child with albinism experiences frequent nosebleeds, easy bruising or chronic infections. These signs and symptoms may indicate the presence of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome or Chediak-Higashi syndrome, which are rare but serious disorders that include albinism.
Several genes provide instructions for making one of several proteins involved in the production of melanin. Melanin is produced by cells called melanocytes, which are found in your skin, hair and eyes.
Albinism is caused by a mutation in one of these genes. Different types of albinism can occur, based mainly on which gene mutation caused the disorder. The mutation may result in no melanin at all or a significantly reduced amount of melanin.
Types of albinism are classified based on how they're inherited and on the gene that is affected.
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA), the most common type, means a person inherited two copies of a mutated gene — one from each parent (autosomal recessive inheritance). It's the result of a mutation in one of seven genes, labeled from OCA1 to OCA7. OCA causes decreased pigment in the skin, hair and eyes, as well as vision problems. The amount of pigment varies by type, and the resulting color of skin, hair and eyes also varies by and within types.
Ocular albinism is mainly limited to the eyes, causing vision problems. The most common form is type 1, inherited by a gene mutation on the X chromosome. X-linked ocular albinism can be passed on by a mother who carries one mutated X gene to her son (X-linked recessive inheritance). Ocular albinism occurs almost exclusively in males and is much less common than OCA.
Albinism related to rare hereditary syndromes can occur. For example, Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome includes a form of OCA as well as bleeding and bruising problems and lung and bowel diseases. Chediak-Higashi syndrome includes a form of OCA as well as immune problems with recurrent infections, neurologic abnormalities and other serious issues.
Albinism can include skin and eye complications as well as social and emotional challenges.
Problems with vision can impact learning, employment and the ability to drive.
People with albinism have skin that is very sensitive to light and sun exposure. Sunburn is one of the most serious complications associated with albinism because it can increase the risk of developing skin cancer and sun damage-related thickening of the skin.
Some people with albinism may experience discrimination. The reactions of other people to those with albinism can often have a negative impact on people with the condition.
People with albinism may experience bullying, teasing or probing questions about their appearance, eyewear or visual aid devices. They usually look very different from members of their own families or ethnic groups, so they may feel like outsiders or be treated like outsiders. These experiences may contribute to social isolation, poor self-esteem and stress.
Using the term "person with albinism" is preferred to avoid the stigma of other terms.
Signs and symptoms of alcohol intolerance — or of a reaction to ingredients in an alcoholic beverage — can include: Facial redness (flushing), Red, itchy skin bumps (hives), Worsening of pre-existing asthma, Runny or stuffy nose, Low blood pressure, Nausea and vomiting, Diarrhea.
Having a mild intolerance to alcohol or something else in alcoholic beverages might not require a trip to a doctor. Simply avoid alcohol, limit how much you drink or avoid certain types of alcoholic beverages.
However, if you have a serious reaction or severe pain, see your doctor. Also, if your symptoms seem to be linked to an allergy or a medication you're taking, see your doctor.
Alcohol intolerance occurs when your body doesn't have the proper enzymes to break down (metabolize) the toxins in alcohol. This is caused by inherited (genetic) traits most often found in Asians.
Other ingredients commonly found in alcoholic beverages, especially in beer or wine, can cause intolerance reactions. These include: Sulfites or other preservatives, Chemicals, grains or other ingredients, Histamine, a byproduct of fermentation or brewing.
In some cases, reactions can be triggered by a true allergy to a grain such as corn, wheat or rye or to another substance in alcoholic beverages.
Rarely, severe pain after drinking alcohol is a sign of a more serious disorder, such as Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Risk factors for alcohol intolerance or other reactions to alcoholic beverages include: Being of Asian descent, Having asthma or hay fever (allergic rhinitis), Having an allergy to grains or to another food, Having Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Depending on the cause, complications of alcohol intolerance or other reactions to alcoholic beverages can include:
Migraines. Drinking alcohol can trigger migraines in some people, possibly as a result of histamines contained in some alcoholic beverages. Your immune system also releases histamines during an allergic reaction.
A severe allergic reaction. In rare instances, an allergic reaction can be life-threatening (anaphylactic reaction) and require emergency treatment.
Alcohol poisoning signs and symptoms include: Confusion, Vomiting, Seizures, Slow breathing (less than eight breaths a minute), Irregular breathing (a gap of more than 10 seconds between breaths), Blue-tinged skin or pale skin, Low body temperature (hypothermia), Passing out (unconsciousness) and can't be awakened.
It's not necessary to have all the above signs or symptoms before you seek medical help. A person with alcohol poisoning who is unconscious or can't be awakened is at risk of dying.
If you suspect that someone has alcohol poisoning — even if you don't see the classic signs and symptoms — seek immediate medical care. Here's what to do:
Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately. Never assume the person will sleep off alcohol poisoning.
Be prepared to provide information. If you know, be sure to tell hospital or emergency personnel the kind and amount of alcohol the person drank, and when.
Don't leave an unconscious person alone. Because alcohol poisoning affects the way the gag reflex works, someone with alcohol poisoning may choke on his or her own vomit and not be able to breathe. While waiting for help, don't try to make the person vomit because he or she could choke.
Help a person who is vomiting. Try to keep him or her sitting up. If the person must lie down, make sure to turn his or her head to the side — this helps prevent choking. Try to keep the person awake to prevent loss of consciousness.
It can be difficult to decide if you think someone is drunk enough to warrant medical intervention, but it's best to err on the side of caution. You may worry about the consequences for yourself or your friend or loved one, particularly if you're underage. But the consequences of not getting the right help in time can be far more serious.
Alcohol in the form of ethanol (ethyl alcohol) is found in alcoholic beverages, mouthwash, cooking extracts, some medications and certain household products. Ethyl alcohol poisoning generally results from drinking too many alcoholic beverages, especially in a short period of time.
Other forms of alcohol — including isopropyl alcohol (found in rubbing alcohol, lotions and some cleaning products) and methanol or ethylene glycol (a common ingredient in antifreeze, paints and solvents) — can cause other types of toxic poisoning that require emergency treatment.
A major cause of alcohol poisoning is binge drinking — a pattern of heavy drinking when a male rapidly consumes five or more alcoholic drinks within two hours, or a female rapidly consumes at least four drinks within two hours. An alcohol binge can occur over hours or last up to several days.
You can consume a fatal dose before you pass out. Even when you're unconscious or you've stopped drinking, alcohol continues to be released from your stomach and intestines into your bloodstream, and the level of alcohol in your body continues to rise.
Unlike food, which can take hours to digest, alcohol is absorbed quickly by your body — long before most other nutrients. And it takes a lot more time for your body to get rid of the alcohol you've consumed. Most alcohol is processed (metabolized) by your liver.
The more you drink, especially in a short period of time, the greater your risk of alcohol poisoning.
One drink is defined as: 12 ounces (355 milliliters) of regular beer (about 5 percent alcohol), 8 to 9 ounces (237 to 266 milliliters) of malt liquor (about 7 percent alcohol), 5 ounces (148 milliliters) of wine (about 12 percent alcohol), 1.5 ounces (44 milliliters) of 80-proof hard liquor (about 40 percent alcohol).
Mixed drinks may contain more than one serving of alcohol and take even longer to metabolize.
A number of factors can increase your risk of alcohol poisoning, including: Your size and weight, Your overall health, Whether you've eaten recently, Whether you're combining alcohol with other drugs, The percentage of alcohol in your drinks, The rate and amount of alcohol consumption, Your tolerance level.
Severe complications can result from alcohol poisoning, including:
Choking. Alcohol may cause vomiting. Because it depresses your gag reflex, this increases the risk of choking on vomit if you've passed out.
Stopping breathing. Accidentally inhaling vomit into your lungs can lead to a dangerous or fatal interruption of breathing (asphyxiation).
Severe dehydration. Vomiting can result in severe dehydration, leading to dangerously low blood pressure and fast heart rate.
Seizures. Your blood sugar level may drop low enough to cause seizures.
Hypothermia. Your body temperature may drop so low that it leads to cardiac arrest.
Irregular heartbeat. Alcohol poisoning can cause the heart to beat irregularly or even stop.
Brain damage. Heavy drinking may cause irreversible brain damage.
Death. Any of the issues above can lead to death.
Alcohol use disorder can be mild, moderate or severe, based on the number of symptoms you experience. Signs and symptoms may include: Being unable to limit the amount of alcohol you drink, Wanting to cut down on how much you drink or making unsuccessful attempts to do so, Spending a lot of time drinking, getting alcohol or recovering from alcohol use, Feeling a strong craving or urge to drink alcohol, Failing to fulfill major obligations at work, school or home due to repeated alcohol use, Continuing to drink alcohol even though you know it's causing physical, social or interpersonal problems, Giving up or reducing social and work activities and hobbies, Using alcohol in situations where it's not safe, such as when driving or swimming, Developing a tolerance to alcohol so you need more to feel its effect or you have a reduced effect from the same amount, Experiencing withdrawal symptoms — such as nausea, sweating and shaking — when you don't drink, or drinking to avoid these symptoms.
Alcohol use disorder can include periods of alcohol intoxication and symptoms of withdrawal.
Alcohol intoxication results as the amount of alcohol in your bloodstream increases. The higher the blood alcohol concentration is, the more impaired you become. Alcohol intoxication causes behavior problems and mental changes. These may include inappropriate behavior, unstable moods, impaired judgment, slurred speech, impaired attention or memory, and poor coordination. You can also have periods called "blackouts," where you don't remember events. Very high blood alcohol levels can lead to coma or even death.
Alcohol withdrawal can occur when alcohol use has been heavy and prolonged and is then stopped or greatly reduced. It can occur within several hours to four or five days later. Signs and symptoms include sweating, rapid heartbeat, hand tremors, problems sleeping, nausea and vomiting, hallucinations, restlessness and agitation, anxiety, and occasionally seizures. Symptoms can be severe enough to impair your ability to function at work or in social situations.
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism defines one standard drink as any one of these: 12 ounces (355 milliliters) of regular beer (about 5 percent alcohol), 8 to 9 ounces (237 to 266 milliliters) of malt liquor (about 7 percent alcohol), 5 ounces (148 milliliters) of unfortified wine (about 12 percent alcohol), 1.5 ounces (44 milliliters) of 80-proof hard liquor (about 40 percent alcohol).
If you feel that you sometimes drink too much alcohol, or your drinking is causing problems, or your family is concerned about your drinking, talk with your doctor. Other ways to get help include talking with a mental health professional or seeking help from a support group such as Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar type of self-help group.
Because denial is common, you may not feel like you have a problem with drinking. You might not recognize how much you drink or how many problems in your life are related to alcohol use. Listen to relatives, friends or co-workers when they ask you to examine your drinking habits or to seek help. Consider talking with someone who has had a problem drinking, but has stopped.
Many people with alcohol use disorder hesitate to get treatment because they don't recognize they have a problem. An intervention from loved ones can help some people recognize and accept that they need professional help. If you're concerned about someone who drinks too much, ask a professional experienced in alcohol treatment for advice on how to approach that person.
Genetic, psychological, social and environmental factors can impact how drinking alcohol affects your body and behavior. Theories suggest that for certain people drinking has a different and stronger impact that can lead to alcohol use disorder.
Over time, drinking too much alcohol may change the normal function of the areas of your brain associated with the experience of pleasure, judgment and the ability to exercise control over your behavior. This may result in craving alcohol to try to restore good feelings or reduce negative ones.
Alcohol use may begin in the teens, but alcohol use disorder occurs more frequently in the 20s and 30s, though it can start at any age.
Steady drinking over time. Drinking too much on a regular basis for an extended period or binge drinking on a regular basis can lead to alcohol-related problems or alcohol use disorder.
Starting at an early age. People who begin drinking — especially binge drinking — at an early age are at a higher risk of alcohol use disorder.
Family history. The risk of alcohol use disorder is higher for people who have a parent or other close relative who has problems with alcohol. This may be influenced by genetic factors.
Depression and other mental health problems. It's common for people with a mental health disorder such as anxiety, depression, schizophrenia or bipolar disorder to have problems with alcohol or other substances.
History of trauma. People with a history of emotional or other trauma are at increased risk of alcohol use disorder.
Having bariatric surgery. Some research studies indicate that having bariatric surgery may increase the risk of developing alcohol use disorder or of relapsing after recovering from alcohol use disorder.
Social and cultural factors. Having friends or a close partner who drinks regularly could increase your risk of alcohol use disorder. The glamorous way that drinking is sometimes portrayed in the media also may send the message that it's OK to drink too much. For young people, the influence of parents, peers and other role models can impact risk.
Alcohol depresses your central nervous system. In some people, the initial reaction may be stimulation. But as you continue to drink, you become sedated.
Too much alcohol affects your speech, muscle coordination and vital centers of your brain. A heavy drinking binge may even cause a life-threatening coma or death. This is of particular concern when you're taking certain medications that also depress the brain's function.
Excessive drinking can reduce your judgment skills and lower inhibitions, leading to poor choices and dangerous situations or behaviors, including: Motor vehicle accidents and other types of accidental injury, such as drowning, Relationship problems, Poor performance at work or school, Increased likelihood of committing violent crimes or being the victim of a crime, Legal problems or problems with employment or finances, Problems with other substance use, Engaging in risky, unprotected sex, or experiencing sexual abuse or date rape, Increased risk of attempted or completed suicide.
Drinking too much alcohol on a single occasion or over time can cause health problems, including:
Liver disease. Heavy drinking can cause increased fat in the liver (hepatic steatosis), inflammation of the liver (alcoholic hepatitis), and over time, irreversible destruction and scarring of liver tissue (cirrhosis).
Digestive problems. Heavy drinking can result in inflammation of the stomach lining (gastritis), as well as stomach and esophageal ulcers. It can also interfere with absorption of B vitamins and other nutrients. Heavy drinking can damage your pancreas or lead to inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis).
Heart problems. Excessive drinking can lead to high blood pressure and increases your risk of an enlarged heart, heart failure or stroke. Even a single binge can cause a serious heart arrhythmia called atrial fibrillation.
Diabetes complications. Alcohol interferes with the release of glucose from your liver and can increase the risk of low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). This is dangerous if you have diabetes and are already taking insulin to lower your blood sugar level.
Sexual function and menstruation issues. Excessive drinking can cause erectile dysfunction in men. In women, it can interrupt menstruation.
Eye problems. Over time, heavy drinking can cause involuntary rapid eye movement (nystagmus) as well as weakness and paralysis of your eye muscles due to a deficiency of vitamin B-1 (thiamin). A thiamin deficiency can also be associated with other brain changes, such as irreversible dementia, if not promptly treated.
Birth defects. Alcohol use during pregnancy may cause miscarriage. It may also cause fetal alcohol syndrome, resulting in giving birth to a child who has physical and developmental problems that last a lifetime.
Bone damage. Alcohol may interfere with the production of new bone. This bone loss can lead to thinning bones (osteoporosis) and an increased risk of fractures. Alcohol can also damage bone marrow, which makes blood cells. This can cause a low platelet count, which may result in bruising and bleeding.
Neurological complications. Excessive drinking can affect your nervous system, causing numbness and pain in your hands and feet, disordered thinking, dementia, and short-term memory loss.
Weakened immune system. Excessive alcohol use can make it harder for your body to resist disease, increasing your risk of various illnesses, especially pneumonia.
Increased risk of cancer. Long-term, excessive alcohol use has been linked to a higher risk of many cancers, including mouth, throat, liver, esophagus, colon and breast cancers. Even moderate drinking can increase the risk of breast cancer.
Medication and alcohol interactions. Some medications interact with alcohol, increasing its toxic effects. Drinking while taking these medications can either increase or decrease their effectiveness, or make them dangerous.
The most common sign of alcoholic hepatitis is yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice).
Other signs and symptoms include: Loss of appetite, Nausea and vomiting, Abdominal tenderness, Fever, often low grade, Fatigue and weakness.
Malnutrition is common in people with alcoholic hepatitis. Drinking large amounts of alcohol suppresses the appetite, and heavy drinkers get most of their calories from alcohol.
Additional signs and symptoms that occur with severe alcoholic hepatitis include: Fluid accumulation in your abdomen (ascites), Confusion and behavior changes due to a buildup of toxins normally broken down and eliminated by the liver, Kidney and liver failure.
Alcoholic hepatitis is a serious, often deadly disease.
See your doctor if you: Have signs or symptoms of alcoholic hepatitis, Can't control your drinking, Would like help cutting back on your drinking.
Alcoholic hepatitis develops when the alcohol you drink damages your liver. Just how alcohol damages the liver — and why it does so only in some heavy drinkers — isn't clear.
These factors are known to play a role in alcoholic hepatitis:
The body's process for breaking down alcohol produces highly toxic chemicals.
These chemicals trigger inflammation that destroys liver cells.
Over time, scars replace healthy liver tissue, interfering with liver function.
This irreversible scarring (cirrhosis) is the final stage of alcoholic liver disease.
Other factors that can contribute to alcoholic hepatitis include:
Other types of hepatitis. If you have hepatitis C and also drink — even moderately — you're more likely to develop cirrhosis than if you don't drink.
Malnutrition. Many people who drink heavily are malnourished because they eat poorly or because alcohol and its byproducts prevent the body from properly absorbing nutrients. Lack of nutrients contributes to liver cell damage.
The major risk factor for alcoholic hepatitis is the amount of alcohol you consume. How much alcohol it takes to put you at risk of alcoholic hepatitis isn't known. But most people with the condition have a history of drinking more than 3.5 ounces (100 grams) — equivalent to seven glasses of wine, seven beers or seven shots of spirits — daily for at least 20 years.
However, alcoholic hepatitis can occur among those who drink less and have other risk factors.
Other risk factors include:
Your sex. Women seem to have a higher risk of developing alcoholic hepatitis possibly because of differences in the way alcohol is processed in women.
Obesity. Heavy drinkers who are overweight might be likelier to develop alcoholic hepatitis and to progress from that condition to cirrhosis.
Genetic factors. Studies suggest there may be a genetic component in alcohol-induced liver disease although it's difficult to separate genetic and environmental factors.
Race and ethnicity. Blacks and Hispanics might be at higher risk of alcoholic hepatitis.
Binge drinking. Having five or more drinks within two hours for men and four or more for women might increase your risk of alcoholic hepatitis.
Complications of alcoholic hepatitis, which result from severe liver damage, relate to scar tissue. Scar tissue can slow blood flow through your liver, increasing pressure in a major blood vessel (portal vein), and the buildup of toxins. Complications include:
Enlarged veins (varices). Blood that can't flow freely through the portal vein can back up into other blood vessels in the stomach and esophagus. These blood vessels have thin walls and are likely to bleed if filled with too much blood. Heavy bleeding in the upper stomach or esophagus is life-threatening and requires immediate medical care.
Ascites. Fluid that accumulates in the abdomen might become infected and require treatment with antibiotics. Ascites isn't life-threatening but are usually a sign of advanced alcoholic hepatitis or cirrhosis.
Confusion, drowsiness and slurred speech (hepatic encephalopathy). A damaged liver has trouble removing toxins from your body. The buildup of toxins can damage your brain. Severe hepatic encephalopathy can result in coma.
Kidney failure. A damaged liver can affect blood flow to the kidneys, resulting in damage to those organs.
Cirrhosis. This scarring of the liver can lead to liver failure.
Allergy symptoms, which depend on the substance involved, can affect your airways, sinuses and nasal passages, skin, and digestive system. Allergic reactions can range from mild to severe. In some severe cases, allergies can trigger a life-threatening reaction known as anaphylaxis.
Hay fever, also called allergic rhinitis, can cause: Sneezing, Itching of the nose, eyes or roof of the mouth, Runny, stuffy nose, Watery, red or swollen eyes (conjunctivitis).
A food allergy can cause: Tingling in the mouth, Swelling of the lips, tongue, face or throat, Hives, Anaphylaxis.
An insect sting allergy can cause: A large area of swelling (edema) at the sting site, Itching or hives all over the body, Cough, chest tightness, wheezing or shortness of breath, Anaphylaxis.
A drug allergy can cause: Hives, Itchy skin, Rash, Facial swelling, Wheezing, Anaphylaxis.
Atopic dermatitis, an allergic skin condition also called eczema, can cause skin to: Itch, Redden, Flake or peel.
Some types of allergies, including allergies to foods and insect stings, can trigger a severe reaction known as anaphylaxis. A life-threatening medical emergency, anaphylaxis can cause you to go into shock. Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include: Loss of consciousness, A drop in blood pressure, Severe shortness of breath, Skin rash, Lightheadedness, A rapid, weak pulse, Nausea and vomiting.
You might see a doctor if you have symptoms you think are caused by an allergy, and over-the-counter allergy medications don't provide enough relief. If you have symptoms after starting a new medication, call the doctor who prescribed it right away.
For a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis), call 911 or your local emergency number or seek emergency medical help. If you carry an epinephrine auto-injector (Auvi-Q, EpiPen, others), give yourself a shot right away.
Even if your symptoms improve after an epinephrine injection, you should go to the emergency department to make sure symptoms don't return when the effects of the injection wear off.
If you've had a severe allergy attack or any signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis in the past, make an appointment to see your doctor. Evaluation, diagnosis and long-term management of anaphylaxis are complicated, so you'll probably need to see a doctor who specializes in allergies and immunology.
An allergy starts when your immune system mistakes a normally harmless substance for a dangerous invader. The immune system then produces antibodies that remain on the alert for that particular allergen. When you're exposed to the allergen again, these antibodies can release a number of immune system chemicals, such as histamine, that cause allergy symptoms.
Common allergy triggers include: Airborne allergens, such as pollen, animal dander, dust mites and mold, Certain foods, particularly peanuts, tree nuts, wheat, soy, fish, shellfish, eggs and milk, Insect stings, such as from a bee or wasp, Medications, particularly penicillin or penicillin-based antibiotics, Latex or other substances you touch, which can cause allergic skin reactions.
You might be more likely to develop an allergy if you: Have a family history of asthma or allergies, such as hay fever, hives or eczema, Are a child, Have asthma or another allergic condition.
Having an allergy increases your risk of certain other medical problems, including:
Anaphylaxis. If you have severe allergies, you're at increased risk of this serious allergy-induced reaction. Foods, medications and insect stings are the most common triggers of anaphylaxis.
Asthma. If you have an allergy, you're more likely to have asthma — an immune system reaction that affects the airways and breathing. In many cases, asthma is triggered by exposure to an allergen in the environment (allergy-induced asthma).
Sinusitis and infections of the ears or lungs. Your risk of getting these conditions is higher if you have hay fever or asthma.
Signs and symptoms of an alpha-gal allergic reaction are often delayed compared with other food allergies. Most reactions to common food allergens — peanuts or shellfish, for example — happen within minutes of exposure. In alpha-gal syndrome, reactions usually appear about three to six hours after exposure. Red meat, such as beef, pork or lamb; organ meats; and products made from mammals, such as gelatins or dairy products, can cause a reaction.
Signs and symptoms of alpha-gal syndrome may include: Hives, itching, or itchy, scaly skin (eczema), Swelling of the lips, face, tongue and throat, or other body parts, Wheezing or shortness of breath, A runny nose, Stomach pain, diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, Sneezing, Headaches, A severe, potentially deadly allergic reaction that restricts breathing(anaphylaxis).
Doctors think the time delay between eating red meat and developing an allergic reaction is one reason the condition was overlooked until recently. A possible connection between a T-bone steak with dinner and hives at midnight was far from obvious.
See your primary care doctor or a doctor who specializes in the diagnosis and treatment of allergies (allergist) if you experience food allergy symptoms after eating — even several hours after eating. Don't rule out red meat as a possible cause of your reaction, especially if you live or spend time outdoors in the southeastern United States or in other parts of the world where alpha-gal syndrome is known to occur.
Seek emergency medical treatment if you develop signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis, such as: Difficulty breathing, Rapid, weak pulse, Dizziness or lightheadedness, Drooling and inability to swallow, Full-body redness and warmth (flushing).
Most people who develop alpha-gal syndrome in the U.S. develop the condition when a Lone Star tick bites them. Bites from other types of ticks can lead to the condition in Europe, Australia and Asia.
Ticks that cause alpha-gal syndrome are believed to carry alpha-gal molecules from the blood of the animals they commonly bite, such as cows and sheep. When a carrier tick bites a human, the tick injects alpha-gal into the person's body.
For unknown reasons, some people have such a strong immune response to these molecules that they can no longer eat red meat or products made from mammals without a mild to severe allergic reaction. People who are exposed to many tick bites over time may develop more-severe symptoms.
People with antibodies related to alpha-gal syndrome can have allergic reactions to the cancer drug cetuximab (Erbitux). Cetuximab-induced cases of this condition are most common in regions with a high population of Lone Star ticks, suggesting a possible link between Lone Star tick bites and an increased vulnerability to alpha-gal syndrome. More research is needed to understand the connection between ticks that carry alpha-gal in certain regions and cases of alpha-gal syndrome that don't seem directly linked to tick bites.
Researchers think the hallmark time-delayed reaction of alpha-gal syndrome is due to the alpha-gal molecules taking longer than other allergens to be digested and enter your circulatory system.
Doctors don't yet know why some people develop alpha-gal syndrome after exposure and others don't. The condition mostly occurs in the southeastern United States and parts of New York, New Jersey and New England. You're at increased risk if you live or spend time in these regions and: Spend a lot of time outdoors, Have received multiple Lone Star tick bites, Have a mast cell abnormality such as indolent systemic mastocytosis.
In the past 20 to 30 years, the Lone Star tick has been found in large numbers as far north as Maine and as far west as central Texas and Oklahoma in the United States.
Alpha-gal syndrome can also occur in other parts of the world such as Europe, Australia and parts of Asia, where bites from certain types of ticks also appear to increase your risk of the condition.
Alpha-gal syndrome can cause food-induced anaphylaxis, a medical emergency that requires treatment with an epinephrine (adrenaline) injector (EpiPen, Auvi-Q, others) and a visit to the emergency room.
Anaphylaxis signs and symptoms can include: Constriction of airways, Swelling of the throat that makes it difficult to breathe, A severe drop in blood pressure (shock), Rapid pulse, Dizziness, lightheadedness or loss of consciousness.
Based on recent research, doctors now believe that some people with unexplained, frequent anaphylaxis may be living with undiagnosed alpha-gal syndrome.
Memory loss is the key symptom of Alzheimer's disease. An early sign of the disease is usually difficulty remembering recent events or conversations. As the disease progresses, memory impairments worsen and other symptoms develop.
At first, a person with Alzheimer's disease may be aware of having difficulty with remembering things and organizing thoughts. A family member or friend may be more likely to notice how the symptoms worsen.
Brain changes associated with Alzheimer's disease lead to growing trouble with:
Everyone has occasional memory lapses. It's normal to lose track of where you put your keys or forget the name of an acquaintance. But the memory loss associated with Alzheimer's disease persists and worsens, affecting the ability to function at work or at home.
People with Alzheimer's may: Repeat statements and questions over and over, Forget conversations, appointments or events, and not remember them later, Routinely misplace possessions, often putting them in illogical locations, Get lost in familiar places, Eventually forget the names of family members and everyday objects, Have trouble finding the right words to identify objects, express thoughts or take part in conversations.
Alzheimer's disease causes difficulty concentrating and thinking, especially about abstract concepts such as numbers.
Multitasking is especially difficult, and it may be challenging to manage finances, balance checkbooks and pay bills on time. These difficulties may progress to an inability to recognize and deal with numbers.
The ability to make reasonable decisions and judgments in everyday situations will decline. For example, a person may make poor or uncharacteristic choices in social interactions or wear clothes that are inappropriate for the weather. It may be more difficult to respond effectively to everyday problems, such as food burning on the stove or unexpected driving situations.
Once-routine activities that require sequential steps, such as planning and cooking a meal or playing a favorite game, become a struggle as the disease progresses. Eventually, people with advanced Alzheimer's may forget how to perform basic tasks such as dressing and bathing.
Brain changes that occur in Alzheimer's disease can affect moods and behaviors. Problems may include the following: Depression, Apathy, Social withdrawal, Mood swings, Distrust in others, Irritability and aggressiveness, Changes in sleeping habits, Wandering, Loss of inhibitions, Delusions, such as believing something has been stolen.
Many important skills are preserved for longer periods even while symptoms worsen. Preserved skills may include reading or listening to books, telling stories and reminiscing, singing, listening to music, dancing, drawing, or doing crafts.
These skills may be preserved longer because they are controlled by parts of the brain affected later in the course of the disease.
A number of conditions, including treatable conditions, can result in memory loss or other dementia symptoms. If you are concerned about your memory or other thinking skills, talk to your doctor for a thorough assessment and diagnosis.
If you are concerned about thinking skills you observe in a family member or friend, talk about your concerns and ask about going together to a doctor's appointment.
Scientists believe that for most people, Alzheimer's disease is caused by a combination of genetic, lifestyle and environmental factors that affect the brain over time.
Less than 1 percent of the time, Alzheimer's is caused by specific genetic changes that virtually guarantee a person will develop the disease. These rare occurrences usually result in disease onset in middle age.
The exact causes of Alzheimer's disease aren't fully understood, but at its core are problems with brain proteins that fail to function normally, disrupt the work of brain cells (neurons) and unleash a series of toxic events. Neurons are damaged, lose connections to each other and eventually die.
The damage most often starts in the region of the brain that controls memory, but the process begins years before the first symptoms. The loss of neurons spreads in a somewhat predictable pattern to other regions of the brains. By the late stage of the disease, the brain has shrunk significantly.
Researchers are focused on the role of two proteins:
Plaques. Beta-amyloid is a leftover fragment of a larger protein. When these fragments cluster together, they appear to have a toxic effect on neurons and to disrupt cell-to-cell communication. These clusters form larger deposits called amyloid plaques, which also include other cellular debris.
Tangles. Tau proteins play a part in a neuron's internal support and transport system to carry nutrients and other essential materials. In Alzheimer's disease, tau proteins change shape and organize themselves into structures called neurofibrillary tangles. The tangles disrupt the transport system and are toxic to cells.
Increasing age is the greatest known risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's is not a part of normal aging, but as you grow older the likelihood of developing Alzheimer's disease increases.
One study, for example, found that annually there were two new diagnoses per 1,000 people ages 65 to 74, 11 new diagnoses per 1,000 people ages 75 to 84, and 37 new diagnoses per 1,000 people age 85 and older.
Your risk of developing Alzheimer's is somewhat higher if a first-degree relative — your parent or sibling — has the disease. Most genetic mechanisms of Alzheimer's among families remain largely unexplained, and the genetic factors are likely complex.
One better understood genetic factor is a form of the apolipoprotein E gene (APOE). A variation of the gene, APOE e4, increases the risk of Alzheimer's disease, but not everyone with this variation of the gene develops the disease.
Scientists have identified rare changes (mutations) in three genes that virtually guarantee a person who inherits one of them will develop Alzheimer's. But these mutations account for less than 1 percent of people with Alzheimer's disease.
Many people with Down syndrome develop Alzheimer's disease. This is likely related to having three copies of chromosome 21 — and subsequently three copies of the gene for the protein that leads to the creation of beta-amyloid. Signs and symptoms of Alzheimer's tend to appear 10 to 20 years earlier in people with Down syndrome than they do for the general population.
There appears to be little difference in risk between men and women, but, overall, there are more women with the disease because they generally live longer than men.
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a decline in memory or other thinking skills that is greater than what would be expected for a person's age, but the decline doesn't prevent a person from functioning in social or work environments.
People who have MCI have a significant risk of developing dementia. When the primary MCI deficit is memory, the condition is more likely to progress to dementia due to Alzheimer's disease. A diagnosis of MCI enables the person to focus on healthy lifestyle changes, develop strategies to compensate for memory loss and schedule regular doctor appointments to monitor symptoms.
People who've had a severe head trauma have a greater risk of Alzheimer's disease.
Research has shown that poor sleep patterns, such as difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep, are associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease.
Research has shown that the same risk factors associated with heart disease may also increase the risk of Alzheimer's disease. These include: Lack of exercise, Obesity, Smoking or exposure to secondhand smoke, High blood pressure, High cholesterol, Poorly controlled type 2 diabetes.
These factors can all be modified. Therefore, changing lifestyle habits can to some degree alter your risk. For example, regular exercise and a healthy low-fat diet rich in fruits and vegetables are associated with a decreased risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
Studies have found an association between lifelong involvement in mentally and socially stimulating activities and a reduced risk of Alzheimer's disease. Low education levels — less than a high school education — appear to be a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease.
Memory and language loss, impaired judgment, and other cognitive changes caused by Alzheimer's can complicate treatment for other health conditions. A person with Alzheimer's disease may not be able to: Communicate that he or she is experiencing pain — for example, from a dental problem, Report symptoms of another illness, Follow a prescribed treatment plan, Notice or describe medication side effects.
As Alzheimer's disease progresses to its last stages, brain changes begin to affect physical functions, such as swallowing, balance, and bowel and bladder control. These effects can increase vulnerability to additional health problems such as: Inhaling food or liquid into the lungs (aspiration), Pneumonia and other infections, Falls, Fractures, Bedsores, Malnutrition or dehydration.
Your medical team will likely be the first to recognize ambiguous genitalia soon after your baby is born. Occasionally, ambiguous genitalia may be suspected before birth (prenatally). Characteristics can vary in severity, depending on when during genital development the problem occurred and the cause of the disorder.
Babies who are genetically female (with two X chromosomes) may have: An enlarged clitoris, which may resemble a penis, Closed labia, or labia that include folds and resemble a scrotum, Lumps that feel like testes in the fused labia.
Babies who are genetically male (with one X and one Y chromosome) may have: A condition in which the narrow tube that carries urine and semen (urethra) doesn't fully extend to the tip of the penis (hypospadias), An abnormally small penis with the urethral opening closer to the scrotum, The absence of one or both testicles in what appears to be the scrotum, Undescended testicles and an empty scrotum that has the appearance of a labia with or without a micropenis.
Ambiguous genitalia primarily occurs when hormone abnormalities during pregnancy interrupt or disturb the fetus's developing sex organs.
A baby's genetic sex is established at conception, based on the sex chromosomes. The mother's egg contains an X chromosome, and the father's sperm contains either an X or a Y chromosome. A baby who inherits the X chromosome from the father is a genetic female (two X chromosomes). A baby who inherits the Y chromosome from the father is a genetic male (one X and one Y chromosome).
Male and female sex organs develop from the same tissue. Whether this tissue becomes male organs or female organs depends on the chromosomes and the presence or absence of male hormones.
In males, a region on the Y chromosome triggers the development of testicles, which produce male hormones. Male genitals develop in response to male hormones from the fetal testicles.
In a fetus without a Y chromosome — without the effects of male hormones — the genitals develop as female.
Occasionally, a chromosomal abnormality may make determination of genetic sex complex.
A disruption of the steps that determine sex can result in a mismatch between the appearance of the external genitals and the internal sex organs or the genetic sex (XX or XY).
A lack or deficiency of male hormones in a genetic male fetus can cause ambiguous genitalia, while exposure to male hormones during development results in ambiguous genitalia in a genetic female.
Mutations in certain genes can influence fetal sex development and cause ambiguous genitalia.
Chromosomal abnormalities, such as a missing sex chromosome or an extra one, also can cause ambiguous genitalia.
In some cases, the cause of ambiguous genitalia may not be determined.
Causes of ambiguous genitalia in a genetic female may include:
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Certain forms of this genetic condition cause the adrenal glands to make excess male hormones (androgens).
Prenatal exposure to male hormones. Certain drugs that contain male hormones or that stimulate production of male hormones in a pregnant woman can cause developing female genitals to become more masculine. A developing baby also may be exposed to excess male hormones if the mother has a disease or condition that causes hormone imbalance.
Tumors. Rarely, a tumor in the mother can produce male hormones.
Causes of ambiguous genitalia in a genetic male may include:
Impaired testicle development. This may be due to genetic abnormalities or unknown causes.
Androgen insensitivity syndrome. In this condition, developing genital tissues don't respond normally to male hormones made by the testes.
Abnormalities with testes or testosterone. Various abnormalities can interfere with the testes' activity. This may include structural problems with the testes, problems with production of the male hormone testosterone or problems with cellular receptors that respond to testosterone.
5a-reductase deficiency. This enzyme defect impairs normal male hormone production.
Ambiguous genitalia can also be a feature of certain rare, complex syndromes that affect many organ systems.
Family history may play a role in the development of ambiguous genitalia, because many disorders of sex development result from genetic abnormalities that can be inherited. Possible risk factors for ambiguous genitalia include a family history of: Unexplained deaths in early infancy, Infertility, absent menstrual periods or excess facial hair in females, Genital abnormalities, Abnormal physical development during puberty, Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, a group of inherited genetic disorders that affect the adrenal glands.
If your family has a history of these risk factors, consider seeking medical advice before trying to conceive. You may also benefit from genetic counseling.
Complications of ambiguous genitalia may include:
Infertility. Whether people with ambiguous genitalia can have children depends on the specific diagnosis. For example, genetic females with congenital adrenal hyperplasia usually can get pregnant if they so choose.
Increased risk of certain cancers. Some disorders of sex development are associated with an increased risk of certain types of cancer.
Ameloblastoma signs and symptoms include pain and swelling in the jaw. Often it causes no symptoms.
The main sign of amenorrhea is the absence of menstrual periods. Depending on the cause of amenorrhea, you might experience other signs or symptoms along with the absence of periods, such as: Milky nipple discharge, Hair loss, Headache, Vision changes, Excess facial hair, Pelvic pain, Acne.
Consult your doctor if you've missed at least three menstrual periods in a row, or if you've never had a menstrual period and you're age 15 or older.
Amenorrhea can occur for a variety of reasons. Some are normal during the course of a woman's life, while others may be a side effect of medication or a sign of a medical problem.
During the normal course of your life, you may experience amenorrhea for natural reasons, such as: Pregnancy, Breast-feeding, Menopause.
Some women who take birth control pills may not have periods. Even after stopping oral contraceptives, it may take some time before regular ovulation and menstruation return. Contraceptives that are injected or implanted also may cause amenorrhea, as can some types of intrauterine devices.
Certain medications can cause menstrual periods to stop, including some types of: Antipsychotics, Cancer chemotherapy, Antidepressants, Blood pressure drugs, Allergy medications.
Sometimes lifestyle factors contribute to amenorrhea, for instance:
Low body weight. Excessively low body weight — about 10 percent under normal weight — interrupts many hormonal functions in your body, potentially halting ovulation. Women who have an eating disorder, such as anorexia or bulimia, often stop having periods because of these abnormal hormonal changes.
Excessive exercise. Women who participate in activities that require rigorous training, such as ballet, may find their menstrual cycles interrupted. Several factors combine to contribute to the loss of periods in athletes, including low body fat, stress and high energy expenditure.
Stress. Mental stress can temporarily alter the functioning of your hypothalamus — an area of your brain that controls the hormones that regulate your menstrual cycle. Ovulation and menstruation may stop as a result. Regular menstrual periods usually resume after your stress decreases.
Many types of medical problems can cause hormonal imbalance, including:
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). PCOS causes relatively high and sustained levels of hormones, rather than the fluctuating levels seen in the normal menstrual cycle.
Thyroid malfunction. An overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) or underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) can cause menstrual irregularities, including amenorrhea.
Pituitary tumor. A noncancerous (benign) tumor in your pituitary gland can interfere with the hormonal regulation of menstruation.
Premature menopause. Menopause usually begins around age 50. But, for some women, the ovarian supply of eggs diminishes before age 40, and menstruation stops.
Problems with the sexual organs themselves also can cause amenorrhea. Examples include:
Uterine scarring. Asherman's syndrome, a condition in which scar tissue builds up in the lining of the uterus, can sometimes occur after a dilation and curettage (D&C), cesarean section or treatment for uterine fibroids. Uterine scarring prevents the normal buildup and shedding of the uterine lining.
Lack of reproductive organs. Sometimes problems arise during fetal development that lead to a girl being born without some major part of her reproductive system, such as her uterus, cervix or vagina. Because her reproductive system didn't develop normally, she can't have menstrual cycles.
Structural abnormality of the vagina. An obstruction of the vagina may prevent visible menstrual bleeding. A membrane or wall may be present in the vagina that blocks the outflow of blood from the uterus and cervix.
Factors that may increase your risk of amenorrhea may include:
Family history. If other women in your family have experienced amenorrhea, you may have inherited a predisposition for the problem.
Eating disorders. If you have an eating disorder, such as anorexia or bulimia, you are at higher risk of developing amenorrhea.
Athletic training. Rigorous athletic training can increase your risk of amenorrhea.
Complications of amenorrhea may include:
Infertility. If you don't ovulate and have menstrual periods, you can't become pregnant.
Osteoporosis. If your amenorrhea is caused by low estrogen levels, you may also be at risk of osteoporosis — a weakening of your bones.
The two main features of amnesia are: Difficulty learning new information following the onset of amnesia (anterograde amnesia), Difficulty remembering past events and previously familiar information (retrograde amnesia).
Most people with amnesia have problems with short-term memory — they can't retain new information. Recent memories are most likely to be lost, while more remote or deeply ingrained memories may be spared. Someone may recall experiences from childhood or know the names of past presidents, but not be able to name the current president, know what month it is or remember what was for breakfast.
Isolated memory loss doesn't affect a person's intelligence, general knowledge, awareness, attention span, judgment, personality or identity. People with amnesia usually can understand written and spoken words and can learn skills such as bike riding or piano playing. They may understand they have a memory disorder.
Amnesia isn't the same as dementia. Dementia often includes memory loss, but it also involves other significant cognitive problems that lead to a decline in daily functioning.
A pattern of forgetfulness is also a common symptom of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), but the memory and other cognitive problems in MCI aren't as severe as those experienced in dementia.
Depending on the cause of the amnesia, other signs and symptoms may include: False memories (confabulation), either completely invented or made up of genuine memories misplaced in time, Confusion or disorientation.
Anyone who experiences unexplained memory loss, head injury, confusion or disorientation requires immediate medical attention.
A person with amnesia may not be able to identify his or her location or have the presence of mind to seek medical care. If someone you know has symptoms of amnesia, help the person get medical attention.
Normal memory function involves many parts of the brain. Any disease or injury that affects the brain can interfere with memory.
Amnesia can result from damage to brain structures that form the limbic system, which controls your emotions and memories. These structures include the thalamus, which lies deep within the center of your brain, and the hippocampal formations, which are situated within the temporal lobes of your brain.
Amnesia caused by brain injury or damage is known as neurological amnesia. Possible causes of neurological amnesia include: Stroke, Brain inflammation (encephalitis) as a result of an infection with a virus such as herpes simplex virus, as an autoimmune reaction to cancer somewhere else in the body (paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis), or as an autoimmune reaction in the absence of cancer, Lack of adequate oxygen in the brain, for example, from a heart attack, respiratory distress or carbon monoxide poisoning, Long-term alcohol abuse leading to thiamin (vitamin B-1) deficiency (Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome), Tumors in areas of the brain that control memory, Degenerative brain diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia, Seizures, Certain medications, such as benzodiazepines or other medications that act as sedatives.
Head injuries that cause a concussion, whether from a car accident or sports, can lead to confusion and problems remembering new information. This is especially common in the early stages of recovery. Mild head injuries typically do not cause lasting amnesia, but more-severe head injuries may cause permanent amnesia.
Another rare type of amnesia, called dissociative (psychogenic) amnesia, stems from emotional shock or trauma, such as being the victim of a violent crime. In this disorder, a person may lose personal memories and autobiographical information, but usually only briefly.
The chance of developing amnesia might increase if you've experienced: Brain surgery, head injury or trauma, Stroke, Alcohol abuse, Seizures.
Amnesia varies in severity and scope, but even mild amnesia takes a toll on daily activities and quality of life. The syndrome can cause problems at work, at school and in social settings.
It may not be possible to recover lost memories. Some people with severe memory problems need to live in a supervised situation or extended-care facility.
Amniotic fluid embolism might develop suddenly and rapidly. Signs and symptoms might include: Sudden shortness of breath, Excess fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema), Sudden low blood pressure, Sudden failure of the heart to effectively pump blood (cardiovascular collapse), Life-threatening problems with blood clotting (disseminated intravascular coagulopathy), Bleeding from the uterus, cesarean incision or intravenous (IV) sites, Altered mental status, such as anxiety or a sense of doom, Chills, Rapid heart rate or disturbances in the rhythm of the heart rate, Fetal distress, such as a slow heart rate, or other fetal heart rate abnormalities, Seizures, Loss of consciousness.
Amniotic fluid embolism occurs when amniotic fluid or fetal material enters the mother's bloodstream. A likely cause is a breakdown in the placental barrier, such as from trauma.
When this breakdown happens, the immune system responds by releasing products that cause an inflammatory reaction, which activates abnormal clotting in the mother's lungs and blood vessels. This can result in a serious blood-clotting disorder known as disseminated intravascular coagulation.
However, amniotic fluid embolisms are rare — and it's likely that some amniotic fluid commonly enters the mother's bloodstream during delivery without causing problems. It's not clear why in some mothers this leads to amniotic fluid embolism.
It's estimated that there are between one and 12 cases of amniotic fluid embolism for every 100,000 deliveries. Because amniotic fluid embolisms are rare, it's difficult to identify risk factors.
Research suggests that several factors might be linked to an increased risk of amniotic fluid embolism, however, including:
Advanced maternal age. If you're 35 or older at the time of your child's birth, you might be at increased risk of amniotic fluid embolism.
Placenta problems. Abnormalities in the placenta — the structure that develops in your uterus during pregnancy — might increase your risk of amniotic fluid embolism. Abnormalities might include the placenta partially or totally covering the cervix (placenta previa) or the placenta peeling away from the inner wall of the uterus before delivery (placental abruption). These conditions can disrupt the physical barriers between you and your baby.
Preeclampsia. Having high blood pressure and excess protein in your urine after 20 weeks of pregnancy (preeclampsia) can increase your risk.
Medically induced labor. Limited research suggests that certain labor induction methods are associated with an increased risk of amniotic fluid embolism. Research on this link, however, is conflicting.
Operative delivery. Having a C-section, a forceps delivery or a vacuum extraction might increase your risk of amniotic fluid embolism. These procedures can disrupt the physical barriers between you and your baby. It's not clear, however, whether operative deliveries are true risk factors for amniotic fluid embolism because they're used after the condition develops to ensure a rapid delivery.
Polyhydramnios. Having too much amniotic fluid around your baby may put you at risk of amniotic fluid embolism.
Amniotic fluid embolism can cause serious complications for you and your baby, including:
Brain injury. Low blood oxygen can cause permanent, severe neurological damage or brain death.
Lengthy hospital stay. Women who survive an amniotic fluid embolism often require treatment in the intensive care unit and — depending on the extent of their complications — might spend weeks or months in the hospital.
Maternal death. The number of women who die of amniotic fluid embolism (mortality rate) is very high. The numbers vary, but as many as 20 percent of maternal deaths in developed countries may be due to amniotic fluid embolisms.
Infant death. Your baby is at risk of brain injury or death. Prompt evaluation and delivery of your baby improves survival.
Signs and symptoms of ampullary cancer may include: Yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice), Clay-colored stools, Abdominal pain, Fever, Bleeding from the rectum, Nausea, Vomiting, Weight loss.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes ampullary cancer.
In general, cancer starts when cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the cell to begin multiplying uncontrollably and to continue living when normal cells would die. The accumulating cells form a tumor that can invade and destroy normal body tissue.
Factors that can increase the risk of ampullary cancer include:
Your age. Ampullary cancer is more common in adults older than 70.
Being male. Males are slightly more likely to develop ampullary cancer than are females.
Inherited syndromes that increase cancer risk. Some gene mutations passed through generations of your family can increase your risk of ampullary cancer significantly. Only a small percentage of ampullary cancers are linked to inherited genes. The most common inherited syndromes that increase ampullary cancer risk are familial adenomatous polyposis and Lynch syndrome, which is also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.
You may not experience signs and symptoms of amyloidosis until the condition is advanced. When signs and symptoms are evident, they depend on which of your organs are affected.
Signs and symptoms of amyloidosis may include: Swelling of your ankles and legs, Severe fatigue and weakness, Shortness of breath with minimal exertion, Unable to lie flat in bed due to shortness of breath, Numbness, tingling or pain in your hands or feet, especially pain in your wrist (carpal tunnel syndrome), Diarrhea, possibly with blood, or constipation, Unintentional weight loss of more than 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms), An enlarged tongue, which sometimes looks rippled around its edge, Skin changes, such as thickening or easy bruising, and purplish patches around the eyes, An irregular heartbeat, Difficulty swallowing.
See your doctor if you persistently experience any of the signs or symptoms associated with amyloidosis.
There are many different types of amyloidosis. Some varieties are hereditary. Others are caused by outside factors, such as inflammatory diseases or long-term dialysis. Many types affect multiple organs, while others affect only one part of the body.
Subtypes of amyloidosis include:
AL amyloidosis (immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis). The most common type of amyloidosis in developed countries, AL amyloidosis is also called primary amyloidosis. It usually affects the heart, kidneys, liver and nerves.
AA amyloidosis. Also known as secondary amyloidosis, this variety is usually triggered by an inflammatory disease, such as rheumatoid arthritis. Improved treatments for severe inflammatory conditions have resulted in a sharp decline in the number of cases of AA amyloidosis in developed countries. It most commonly affects the kidneys, liver and spleen.
Hereditary amyloidosis (familial amyloidosis). This inherited disorder often affects the nerves, heart and kidneys. It most commonly happens when a protein made by your liver is abnormal. This protein is called transthyretin (TTR).
Wild-type amyloidosis. This variety of amyloidosis occurs when the TTR protein made by the liver is normal but produces amyloid for unknown reasons. Formerly known as senile systemic amyloidosis, wild-type amyloidosis tends to affect men over age 70 and typically targets the heart. It can also cause carpal tunnel syndrome.
Localized amyloidosis. This type of amyloidosis often has a better prognosis than the varieties that affect multiple organ systems. Typical sites for localized amyloidosis include the bladder, skin, throat or lungs. Correct diagnosis is important so that treatments that affect the entire body can be avoided.
Factors that increase your risk of amyloidosis include:
Age. Most people diagnosed with amyloidosis are between ages 60 and 70, although earlier onset occurs.
Sex. Amyloidosis occurs more commonly in men.
Other diseases. Having a chronic infectious or inflammatory disease increases your risk of AA amyloidosis.
Family history. Some types of amyloidosis are hereditary.
Kidney dialysis. Dialysis can't always remove large proteins from the blood. If you're on dialysis, abnormal proteins can build up in your blood and eventually be deposited in tissue. This condition is less common with more modern dialysis techniques.
Race. People of African descent appear to be at higher risk of carrying a genetic mutation associated with a type of amyloidosis that can harm the heart.
The potential complications of amyloidosis depend on which organs the amyloid deposits affect. Amyloidosis can seriously damage your:
Heart. Amyloid reduces your heart's ability to fill with blood between heartbeats. Less blood is pumped with each beat, and you may experience shortness of breath. If amyloidosis affects your heart's electrical system, your heart rhythm may be disturbed. Amyloid-related heart problems can become life-threatening.
Kidneys. Amyloid can harm the kidneys' filtering system, causing protein to leak from your blood into your urine. The kidneys' ability to remove waste products from your body is lowered, which may eventually lead to kidney failure and the need for dialysis.
Nervous system. You may experience pain, numbness or tingling of your fingers or numbness, lack of feeling or a burning sensation in your toes or the soles of your feet. If amyloid affects the nerves that control your bowel function, you may experience periods of alternating constipation and diarrhea. If it affects the nerves that control blood pressure, you may feel faint after standing up too quickly.
Signs and symptoms of ALS vary greatly from person to person, depending on which neurons are affected. Signs and symptoms might include: Difficulty walking or doing normal daily activities, Tripping and falling, Weakness in your leg, feet or ankles, Hand weakness or clumsiness, Slurred speech or trouble swallowing, Muscle cramps and twitching in your arms, shoulders and tongue, Inappropriate crying, laughing or yawning, Cognitive and behavioral changes.
ALS often starts in the hands, feet or limbs, and then spreads to other parts of your body. As the disease advances and nerve cells are destroyed, your muscles get weaker. This eventually affects chewing, swallowing, speaking and breathing.
There's generally no pain in the early stages of ALS, and pain is uncommon in the later stages. ALS doesn't usually affect your bladder control or your senses.
ALS affects the nerve cells that control voluntary muscle movements such as walking and talking (motor neurons). ALS causes the motor neurons to gradually deteriorate, and then die. Motor neurons extend from the brain to the spinal cord to muscles throughout the body. When motor neurons are damaged, they stop sending messages to the muscles, so the muscles can't function.
ALS is inherited in 5% to 10% of people. For the rest, the cause isn't known.
Researchers continue to study possible causes of ALS. Most theories center on a complex interaction between genetic and environmental factors.
Established risk factors for ALS include:
Heredity. Five to 10 percent of the people with ALS inherited it (familial ALS). In most people with familial ALS, their children have a 50-50 chance of developing the disease.
Age. ALS risk increases with age, and is most common between the ages of 40 and the mid-60s.
Sex. Before the age of 65, slightly more men than women develop ALS. This sex difference disappears after age 70.
Genetics. Some studies examining the entire human genome found many similarities in the genetic variations of people with familial ALS and some people with noninherited ALS. These genetic variations might make people more susceptible to ALS.
Environmental factors, such as the following, might trigger ALS.
Smoking. Smoking is the only likely environmental risk factor for ALS. The risk seems to be greatest for women, particularly after menopause.
Environmental toxin exposure. Some evidence suggests that exposure to lead or other substances in the workplace or at home might be linked to ALS. Much study has been done, but no single agent or chemical has been consistently associated with ALS.
Military service. Studies indicate that people who have served in the military are at higher risk of ALS. It's unclear what about military service might trigger the development of ALS. It might include exposure to certain metals or chemicals, traumatic injuries, viral infections, and intense exertion.
As the disease progresses, ALS causes complications, such as:
Over time, ALS paralyzes the muscles you use to breathe. You might need a device to help you breathe at night, similar to what someone with sleep apnea might wear. For example, you may be given continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) to assist with your breathing at night.
Some people with advanced ALS choose to have a tracheostomy — a surgically created hole at the front of the neck leading to the windpipe (trachea) — for full-time use of a respirator that inflates and deflates their lungs.
The most common cause of death for people with ALS is respiratory failure. On average, death occurs within three to five years after symptoms begin. However, some people with ALS live 10 or more years.
Most people with ALS develop trouble speaking. This usually starts as occasional, mild slurring of words, but becomes more severe. Speech eventually becomes difficult for others to understand, and people with ALS often rely on other communication technologies to communicate.
People with ALS can develop malnutrition and dehydration from damage to the muscles that control swallowing. They are also at higher risk of getting food, liquids or saliva into the lungs, which can cause pneumonia. A feeding tube can reduce these risks and ensure proper hydration and nutrition.
Some people with ALS have problems with memory and decision-making, and some are eventually diagnosed with a form of dementia called frontotemporal dementia.
Anal cancer signs and symptoms include: Bleeding from the anus or rectum, Pain in the area of the anus, A mass or growth in the anal canal, Anal itching.
Talk to your doctor about any signs and symptoms that bother you, especially if you have any factors that increase your risk of anal cancer.
Anal cancer forms when a genetic mutation turns normal, healthy cells into abnormal cells. Healthy cells grow and multiply at a set rate, eventually dying at a set time. Abnormal cells grow and multiply out of control, and they don't die. The accumulating abnormal cells form a mass (tumor). Cancer cells invade nearby tissues and can separate from an initial tumor to spread elsewhere in the body (metastasize).
Anal cancer is closely related to a sexually transmitted infection called human papillomavirus (HPV). Evidence of HPV is detected in the majority of anal cancers. HPV is thought to be the most common cause of anal cancers.
Several factors have been found to increase the risk of anal cancer, including:
Older age. Most cases of anal cancer occur in people age 50 and older.
Many sexual partners. People who have many sexual partners over their lifetimes have a greater risk of anal cancer.
Anal sex. People who engage in receptive anal sex have an increased risk of anal cancer.
Smoking. Smoking cigarettes may increase your risk of anal cancer.
History of cancer. Those who have had cervical, vulvar or vaginal cancer have an increased risk of anal cancer.
Human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV infection increases your risk of several cancers, including anal cancer and cervical cancer. HPV infection is a sexually transmitted infection that can also cause genital warts.
Drugs or conditions that suppress your immune system. People who take drugs to suppress their immune systems (immunosuppressive drugs), including people who have received organ transplants, may have an increased risk of anal cancer. HIV — the virus that causes AIDS — suppresses the immune system and increases the risk of anal cancer.
Anal cancer rarely spreads (metastasizes) to distant parts of the body. Only a small percentage of tumors are found to have spread, but those that do are especially difficult to treat. Anal cancer that metastasizes most commonly spreads to the liver and the lungs.
Signs and symptoms of an anal fissure include: Pain, sometimes severe, during bowel movements, Pain after bowel movements that can last up to several hours, Bright red blood on the stool or toilet paper after a bowel movement, A visible crack in the skin around the anus, A small lump or skin tag on the skin near the anal fissure.
See your doctor if you have pain during bowel movements or notice blood on stools or toilet paper after a bowel movement.
Common causes of anal fissure include: Passing large or hard stools, Constipation and straining during bowel movements, Chronic diarrhea, Anal intercourse, Childbirth.
Less common causes of anal fissures include: Crohn's disease or another inflammatory bowel disease, Anal cancer, HIV, Tuberculosis, Syphilis.
Factors that may increase your risk of developing an anal fissure include:
Constipation. Straining during bowel movements and passing hard stools increase the risk of tearing.
Childbirth. Anal fissures are more common in women after they give birth.
Crohn's disease. This inflammatory bowel disease causes chronic inflammation of the intestinal tract, which may make the lining of the anal canal more vulnerable to tearing.
Anal intercourse.
Age. Anal fissures can occur at any age, but are more common in infants and middle-aged adults.
Complications of anal fissure can include:
Failure to heal. An anal fissure that fails to heal within eight weeks is considered chronic and may need further treatment.
Recurrence. Once you've experienced an anal fissure, you are prone to having another one.
A tear that extends to surrounding muscles. An anal fissure may extend into the ring of muscle that holds your anus closed (internal anal sphincter), making it more difficult for your anal fissure to heal. An unhealed fissure can trigger a cycle of discomfort that may require medications or surgery to reduce the pain and to repair or remove the fissure.
Anal itching may be associated with redness, burning and soreness. The itching and irritation may be temporary or more persistent, depending on the cause.
Most anal itching doesn't require medical care. See your doctor if: Anal itching is severe or persistent, You have anal bleeding or stool leakage, The anal area seems to be infected, You can't figure out what's causing a persistent itch.
Persistent anal itching may be related to a skin condition or other health problem that requires medical treatment.
Sometimes the cause of anal itching isn't identifiable. Possible causes of anal itching include:
Irritants. Fecal incontinence and long-term (chronic) diarrhea can irritate the skin. Or your skin care routine may include products or behaviors that irritate the skin, such as using harsh soaps or moist wipes and washing too aggressively.
Infections. These include sexually transmitted infections, pinworms, and yeast infections.
Skin conditions. Sometimes anal itching is the result of a specific skin condition, such as psoriasis or contact dermatitis.
Other medical conditions. These include diabetes, thyroid disease, hemorrhoids, anal tumors.
Anaphylaxis symptoms usually occur within minutes of exposure to an allergen. Sometimes, however, it can occur a half-hour or longer after exposure. Signs and symptoms include: Skin reactions, including hives and itching and flushed or pale skin, Low blood pressure (hypotension), Constriction of your airways and a swollen tongue or throat, which can cause wheezing and trouble breathing, A weak and rapid pulse, Nausea, vomiting or diarrhea, Dizziness or fainting.
Seek emergency medical help if you, your child or someone else you're with has a severe allergic reaction. Don't wait to see if the symptoms go away.
If the person having the attack carries an epinephrine autoinjector, administer it right away. Even if symptoms improve after the injection, you still need to go to an emergency room to make sure symptoms don't recur, even without more exposure to your allergen. This second reaction is called biphasic anaphylaxis.
Make an appointment to see your doctor if you or your child has had a severe allergy attack or signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis in the past.
The diagnosis and long-term management of anaphylaxis are complicated, so you'll probably need to see a doctor who specializes in allergies and immunology.
Your immune system produces antibodies that defend against foreign substances. This is good when a foreign substance is harmful, such as certain bacteria or viruses. But some people's immune systems overreact to substances that don't normally cause an allergic reaction.
Allergy symptoms aren't usually life-threatening, but a severe allergic reaction can lead to anaphylaxis. Even if you or your child has had only a mild anaphylactic reaction in the past, there's a risk of more severe anaphylaxis after another exposure to the allergy-causing substance.
The most common anaphylaxis triggers in children are food allergies, such as to peanuts, and tree nuts, fish, shellfish and milk. Besides allergy to peanuts, nuts, fish and shellfish, anaphylaxis triggers in adults include: Certain medications, including antibiotics, aspirin and other over-the-counter pain relievers, and the intravenous (IV) contrast used in some imaging tests, Stings from bees, yellow jackets, wasps, hornets and fire ants, Latex.
Although not common, some people develop anaphylaxis from aerobic exercise, such as jogging, or even less intense physical activity, such as walking. Eating certain foods before exercise or exercising when the weather is hot, cold or humid also has been linked to anaphylaxis in some people. Talk with your doctor about precautions to take when exercising.
If you don't know what triggers your allergy attack, certain tests can help identify the allergen. In some cases, the cause of anaphylaxis is never identified (idiopathic anaphylaxis).
There aren't many known risk factors for anaphylaxis, but some things that might increase your risk include:
Previous anaphylaxis. If you've had anaphylaxis once, your risk of having this serious reaction increases. Future reactions might be more severe than the first reaction.
Allergies or asthma. People who have either condition are at increased risk of having anaphylaxis.
Certain other conditions. These include heart disease and an abnormal accumulation of a certain type of white blood cell (mastocytosis).
An anaphylactic reaction can be life-threatening — it can stop your breathing or your heartbeat.
Anemia signs and symptoms vary depending on the cause. If the anemia is caused by a chronic disease, the disease can mask them, so that the anemia might be detected by tests for another condition.
Depending on the causes of your anemia, you might have no symptoms. Signs and symptoms, if they do occur, might include: Fatigue, Weakness, Pale or yellowish skin, Irregular heartbeats, Shortness of breath, Dizziness or lightheadedness, Chest pain, Cold hands and feet, Headaches.
At first, anemia can be so mild that you don't notice it. But symptoms worsen as anemia worsens.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you're feeling fatigued and you don't know why.
Fatigue has many causes besides anemia, so don't assume that if you're tired you must be anemic. Some people learn that their hemoglobin is low, which indicates anemia, when they donate blood. If you're told that you can't donate because of low hemoglobin, make an appointment with your doctor.
Anemia occurs when your blood doesn't have enough red blood cells.
This can happen if: Your body doesn't make enough red blood cells, Bleeding causes you to lose red blood cells more quickly than they can be replaced, Your body destroys red blood cells.
Your body makes three types of blood cells — white blood cells to fight infection, platelets to help your blood clot and red blood cells to carry oxygen throughout your body.
Red blood cells contain hemoglobin — an iron-rich protein that gives blood its red color. Hemoglobin enables red blood cells to carry oxygen from your lungs to all parts of your body and to carry carbon dioxide from other parts of the body to your lungs to be exhaled.
Most blood cells, including red blood cells, are produced regularly in your bone marrow — a spongy material found within the cavities of many of your large bones. To produce hemoglobin and red blood cells, your body needs iron, vitamin B-12, folate and other nutrients from the foods you eat.
Different types of anemia have different causes. They include:
Iron deficiency anemia. This most common type of anemia is caused by a shortage of iron in your body. Your bone marrow needs iron to make hemoglobin. Without adequate iron, your body can't produce enough hemoglobin for red blood cells.
Without iron supplementation, this type of anemia occurs in many pregnant women. It is also caused by blood loss, such as from heavy menstrual bleeding, an ulcer, cancer and regular use of some over-the-counter pain relievers, especially aspirin, which can cause inflammation of the stomach lining resulting in blood loss.
Vitamin deficiency anemia. Besides iron, your body needs folate and vitamin B-12 to produce enough healthy red blood cells. A diet lacking in these and other key nutrients can cause decreased red blood cell production.
Also, some people who consume enough B-12 aren't able to absorb the vitamin. This can lead to vitamin deficiency anemia, also known as pernicious anemia.
Anemia of inflammation. Certain diseases — such as cancer, HIV/AIDS, rheumatoid arthritis, kidney disease, Crohn's disease and other acute or chronic inflammatory diseases — can interfere with the production of red blood cells.
Aplastic anemia. This rare, life-threatening anemia occurs when your body doesn't produce enough red blood cells. Causes of aplastic anemia include infections, certain medicines, autoimmune diseases and exposure to toxic chemicals.
Anemias associated with bone marrow disease. A variety of diseases, such as leukemia and myelofibrosis, can cause anemia by affecting blood production in your bone marrow. The effects of these types of cancer and cancer-like disorders vary from mild to life-threatening.
Hemolytic anemias. This group of anemias develops when red blood cells are destroyed faster than bone marrow can replace them. Certain blood diseases increase red blood cell destruction. You can inherit a hemolytic anemia, or you can develop it later in life.
Sickle cell anemia. This inherited and sometimes serious condition is a hemolytic anemia. It's caused by a defective form of hemoglobin that forces red blood cells to assume an abnormal crescent (sickle) shape. These irregular blood cells die prematurely, resulting in a chronic shortage of red blood cells.
These factors place you at increased risk of anemia:
A diet lacking in certain vitamins and minerals. A diet consistently low in iron, vitamin B-12 and folate increases your risk of anemia.
Intestinal disorders. Having an intestinal disorder that affects the absorption of nutrients in your small intestine — such as Crohn's disease and celiac disease — puts you at risk of anemia.
Menstruation. In general, women who haven't had menopause have a greater risk of iron deficiency anemia than do men and postmenopausal women. Menstruation causes the loss of red blood cells.
Pregnancy. If you're pregnant and aren't taking a multivitamin with folic acid and iron, you're at an increased risk of anemia.
Chronic conditions. If you have cancer, kidney failure, diabetes or another chronic condition, you could be at risk of anemia of chronic disease. These conditions can lead to a shortage of red blood cells.
Slow, chronic blood loss from an ulcer or other source within your body can deplete your body's store of iron, leading to iron deficiency anemia.
Family history. If your family has a history of an inherited anemia, such as sickle cell anemia, you also might be at increased risk of the condition.
Other factors. A history of certain infections, blood diseases and autoimmune disorders increases your risk of anemia. Alcoholism, exposure to toxic chemicals, and the use of some medications can affect red blood cell production and lead to anemia.
Age. People over age 65 are at increased risk of anemia.
Left untreated, anemia can cause many health problems, such as:
Severe fatigue. Severe anemia can make you so tired that you can't complete everyday tasks.
Pregnancy complications. Pregnant women with folate deficiency anemia may be more likely to have complications, such as premature birth.
Heart problems. Anemia can lead to a rapid or irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia). When you're anemic your heart must pump more blood to make up for the lack of oxygen in the blood. This can lead to an enlarged heart or heart failure.
Death. Some inherited anemias, such as sickle cell anemia, can lead to life-threatening complications. Losing a lot of blood quickly results in acute, severe anemia and can be fatal.
Angelman syndrome signs and symptoms include: Developmental delays, including no crawling or babbling at 6 to 12 months, Intellectual disability, No speech or minimal speech, Difficulty walking, moving or balancing well, Frequent smiling and laughter, Happy, excitable personality, Trouble going to sleep and staying asleep.
People who have Angelman syndrome may also show the following features: Seizures, usually beginning between 2 and 3 years of age, Stiff or jerky movements, Small head size, with flatness in the back of the head, Tongue thrusting, Hair, skin and eyes that are light in color, Unusual behaviors, such as hand flapping and arms uplifted while walking, Sleep problems.
Most babies with Angelman syndrome don't show signs or symptoms at birth. The first signs of Angelman syndrome are usually developmental delays, such as lack of crawling or babbling, between 6 and 12 months.
If your child seems to have developmental delays or if your child has other signs or symptoms of Angelman syndrome, make an appointment with your child's doctor.
Angelman syndrome is a genetic disorder. It's usually caused by problems with a gene located on chromosome 15 called the ubiquitin protein ligase E3A (UBE3A) gene.
You receive your pairs of genes from your parents — one copy from your mother (maternal copy) and the other from your father (paternal copy).
Your cells typically use information from both copies, but in a small number of genes, only one copy is active.
Normally, only the maternal copy of the UBE3A gene is active in the brain. Most cases of Angelman syndrome occur when part of the maternal copy is missing or damaged.
In a few cases, Angelman syndrome is caused when two paternal copies of the gene are inherited, instead of one from each parent.
Angelman syndrome is rare. Researchers usually don't know what causes the genetic changes that result in Angelman syndrome. Most people with Angelman syndrome don't have a family history of the disease.
Occasionally, Angelman syndrome may be inherited from a parent. A family history of the disease may increase a baby's risk of developing Angelman syndrome.
Complications associated with Angelman syndrome include:
Feeding difficulties. Difficulty coordinating sucking and swallowing may cause feeding problems in infants. Your pediatrician may recommend a high-calorie formula to help your baby gain weight.
Hyperactivity. Children with Angelman syndrome often move quickly from one activity to another, have a short attention span, and keep their hands or a toy in their mouths. Hyperactivity often decreases with age, and medication usually isn't necessary.
Sleep disorders. People with Angelman syndrome often have abnormal sleep-wake patterns and may require less sleep than most people. Sleep difficulties may improve with age. Medication and behavior therapy may help control sleep disorders.
Curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Some people with Angelman syndrome develop an abnormal side-to-side spinal curvature over time.
Obesity. Older children with Angelman syndrome tend to have large appetites, which may lead to obesity.
Angina symptoms include chest pain and discomfort, possibly described as pressure, squeezing, burning or fullness.
You may also have pain in your arms, neck, jaw, shoulder or back.
Other symptoms that you may have with angina include: Dizziness, Fatigue, Nausea, Shortness of breath, Sweating.
These symptoms need to be evaluated immediately by a doctor who can determine whether you have stable angina, or unstable angina, which can be a precursor to a heart attack.
Stable angina is the most common form of angina. It usually happens when you exert yourself and goes away with rest. For example, pain that comes on when you're walking uphill or in the cold weather may be angina. Develops when your heart works harder, such as when you exercise or climb stairs, Can usually be predicted and the pain is usually similar to previous types of chest pain you've had, Lasts a short time, perhaps five minutes or less, Disappears sooner if you rest or use your angina medication.
The severity, duration and type of angina can vary. New or different symptoms may signal a more dangerous form of angina (unstable angina) or a heart attack. Occurs even at rest, Is a change in your usual pattern of angina, Is unexpected, Is usually more severe and lasts longer than stable angina, maybe 30 minutes or longer, May not disappear with rest or use of angina medication, Might signal a heart attack.
There's another type of angina, called variant angina or Prinzmetal's angina. This type of angina is rarer. It's caused by a spasm in your heart's arteries that temporarily reduces blood flow. Usually happens when you're resting, Is often severe, May be relieved by angina medication.
Symptoms of angina in women can be different from angina symptoms that occur in men. These differences may lead to delays in seeking treatment. For example, chest pain is a common symptom in women with angina, but it may not be the only symptom or the most prevalent symptom for women. Women may also have symptoms such as: Nausea, Shortness of breath, Abdominal pain, Discomfort in the neck, jaw or back, Stabbing pain instead of chest pressure.
If your chest pain lasts longer than a few minutes and doesn't go away when you rest or take your angina medications, it may be a sign you're having a heart attack. Call 911 or emergency medical help. Arrange for transportation. Only drive yourself to the hospital as a last resort.
If chest discomfort is a new symptom for you, it's important to see your doctor to find out what's causing your chest pain and to get proper treatment. If you've been diagnosed with stable angina and it gets worse or changes, seek medical attention immediately.
Angina is caused by reduced blood flow to your heart muscle. Your blood carries oxygen, which your heart muscle needs to survive. When your heart muscle isn't getting enough oxygen, it causes a condition called ischemia.
The most common cause of reduced blood flow to your heart muscle is coronary artery disease (CAD). Your heart (coronary) arteries can become narrowed by fatty deposits called plaques. This is called atherosclerosis.
During times of low oxygen demand — when you're resting, for example — your heart muscle may still be able to function on the reduced amount of blood flow without triggering angina symptoms. But when you increase the demand for oxygen, such as when you exercise, angina can result.
Stable angina. Stable angina is usually triggered by physical activity. When you climb stairs, exercise or walk, your heart demands more blood, but narrowed arteries slow down blood flow. Besides physical activity, other factors such as emotional stress, cold temperatures, heavy meals and smoking also can narrow arteries and trigger angina.
Unstable angina. If fatty deposits (plaques) in a blood vessel rupture or a blood clot forms, it can quickly block or reduce flow through a narrowed artery. This can suddenly and severely decrease blood flow to your heart muscle. Unstable angina can also be caused by blood clots that block or partially block your heart's blood vessels.
Unstable angina worsens and isn't relieved by rest or your usual medications. If the blood flow doesn't improve, your heart is starved of oxygen and a heart attack occurs. Unstable angina is dangerous and requires emergency treatment.
Prinzmetal's angina. This type of angina is caused by a sudden spasm in a coronary artery, which temporarily narrows the artery. This narrowing reduces blood flow to your heart, causing severe chest pain. Prinzmetal's angina most often occurs at rest, typically overnight. Attacks tend to occur in clusters. Emotional stress, smoking, medications that tighten blood vessels (such as some migraine drugs) and use of the illegal drug cocaine may trigger Prinzmetal's angina.
The following risk factors increase your risk of coronary artery disease and angina:
Tobacco use. Chewing tobacco, smoking and long-term exposure to secondhand smoke damage the interior walls of arteries — including arteries to your heart — allowing deposits of cholesterol to collect and block blood flow.
Diabetes. Diabetes increases the risk of coronary artery disease, which leads to angina and heart attacks by speeding up atherosclerosis and increasing your cholesterol levels.
High blood pressure. Over time, high blood pressure damages arteries by accelerating hardening of the arteries.
High blood cholesterol or triglyceride levels. Cholesterol is a major part of the deposits that can narrow arteries throughout your body, including those that supply your heart. A high level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, also known as "bad" cholesterol, increases your risk of angina and heart attacks. A high level of triglycerides, a type of blood fat related to your diet, also is unhealthy.
Family history of heart disease. If a family member has coronary artery disease or has had a heart attack, you're at a greater risk of developing angina.
Older age. Men older than 45 and women older than 55 have a greater risk than do younger adults.
Lack of exercise. An inactive lifestyle contributes to high cholesterol, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes and obesity. However, it is important to talk with your doctor before starting an exercise program.
Obesity. Obesity is linked with high blood cholesterol levels, high blood pressure and diabetes, all which increase your risk of angina and heart disease. If you're overweight, your heart has to work harder to supply blood to the body.
Stress. Stress can increase your risk of angina and heart attacks. Too much stress, as well as anger, also can raise your blood pressure. Surges of hormones produced during stress can narrow your arteries and worsen angina.
The chest pain that occurs with angina can make doing some normal activities, such as walking, uncomfortable. However, the most dangerous complication is a heart attack. Pressure, fullness or a squeezing pain in the center of your chest that lasts for more than a few minutes, Pain extending beyond your chest to your shoulder, arm, back, or even to your teeth and jaw, Increasing episodes of chest pain, Nausea and vomiting, Prolonged pain in the upper abdomen, Shortness of breath, Sweating, Fainting, Impending sense of doom.
If you have any of these symptoms, seek emergency medical attention immediately.
Angiosarcoma signs and symptoms may vary based on where the cancer occurs.
Most often, angiosarcoma occurs in the skin on the head and neck, particularly the scalp. Signs and symptoms of this form of angiosarcoma include: A raised, purplish area of skin that looks like a bruise, A bruise-like lesion that grows larger over time, A lesion that may bleed when scratched or bumped, Swelling in the surrounding skin.
When angiosarcoma affects organs, such as the liver or the heart, it often causes pain. Other symptoms depend on the location of the angiosarcoma.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes most angiosarcomas, though doctors have identified factors that may increase your risk of the disease.
Doctors know that something happens that causes a cell in the lining of a blood vessel or lymph vessel to develop an error (mutation) in its genetic code. The mutation tells the cell to grow quickly, making more abnormal cells. The abnormal cells continue living when other cells would die.
The result is a buildup of abnormal cells that grows from the affected blood vessel or lymph vessel. With time, cells may break off and spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body.
Factors that may increase your risk of angiosarcoma include:
Radiation therapy. Treatment with radiation for cancer or other conditions may increase your risk of angiosarcoma. A rare complication of radiation therapy, angiosarcoma typically occurs five to 10 years after treatment.
Swelling caused by lymph vessel damage (lymphedema). Lymphedema is swelling caused by a backup of lymph fluid that occurs when the lymphatic system is blocked or damaged. Lymphedema is a risk whenever lymph nodes are removed during surgery — a technique that's often used to treat cancer. Lymphedema can also occur in response to infection or other conditions.
Chemicals. Liver angiosarcoma has been linked to exposure to several chemicals, including vinyl chloride and arsenic.
Signs and symptoms of anhidrosis include: Little or no perspiration, Dizziness, Muscle cramps or weakness, Flushing, Feeling hot.
A lack of perspiration can occur: Over most of your body (generalized), In a single area, In scattered patches.
Areas that can sweat may try to produce more perspiration, so it's possible to sweat profusely on one part of your body and very little or not at all on another. Anhidrosis that affects a large portion of your body prevents proper cooling, so vigorous exercise, hard physical work and hot weather can cause heat cramps, heat exhaustion or even heatstroke.
Anhidrosis can develop on its own or as one of several signs and symptoms of another condition, such as diabetes or skin injury.
If you barely sweat, even when it's hot or you're working or exercising strenuously, talk to your doctor. Talk to your doctor if you notice you're sweating less than usual.
Seek immediate medical attention if you develop signs or symptoms of heatstroke.
Anhidrosis occurs when your sweat glands don't function properly, either as a result of a condition you're born with (congenital condition) or one that affects your nerves or skin. Dehydration also can cause anhidrosis. Sometimes the cause of anhidrosis can't be found.
Causes of anhidrosis include: Conditions you're born with, such as certain congenital dysplasias that affect the development of sweat glands, Inherited conditions that affect your metabolic system, such as Fabry's disease, Connective tissue diseases, such as Sjogren's syndrome, which causes dry eyes and mouth, Skin damage, such as from burns or radiation therapy, or diseases that clog your pores (poral occlusion), such as psoriasis, Conditions that cause nerve damage (neuropathy), such as diabetes, alcoholism and Guillain-Barre syndrome, Certain drugs, such as morphine and botulinum toxin type A, and those used to treat psychosis.
Heat-related illnesses are the most serious complications of anhidrosis. Children are especially vulnerable because their core temperatures rise faster than adults', and their bodies release heat less efficiently.
Heat-related problems include:
Heat cramps. Symptoms include muscle pain or spasms. Rest in a cool place and drink water or a sports drink. Get medical help if cramps last longer than an hour.
Heat exhaustion. Signs and symptoms include weakness, nausea and a rapid pulse. Move to a cool place and get medical help if symptoms last longer than an hour.
Heatstroke. This life-threatening condition occurs when your body temperature reaches 103 F (39.5 C) or higher. Skin may be hot, red or dry. If not treated immediately, heatstroke can cause loss of consciousness.
Early signs and symptoms of ankylosing spondylitis might include pain and stiffness in your lower back and hips, especially in the morning and after periods of inactivity. Neck pain and fatigue also are common. Over time, symptoms might worsen, improve or stop at irregular intervals.
The areas most commonly affected are: The joint between the base of your spine and your pelvis, The vertebrae in your lower back, The places where your tendons and ligaments attach to bones, mainly in your spine, but sometimes along the back of your heel, The cartilage between your breastbone and ribs, Your hip and shoulder joints.
Seek medical attention if you have low back or buttock pain that came on slowly, is worse in the morning or awakens you from your sleep in the second half of the night — particularly if this pain improves with exercise and worsens with rest. See an eye specialist immediately if you develop a painful red eye, severe light sensitivity or blurred vision.
Ankylosing spondylitis has no known specific cause, though genetic factors seem to be involved. In particular, people who have a gene called HLA-B27 are at a greatly increased risk of developing ankylosing spondylitis. However, only some people with the gene develop the condition.
Your sex. Men are more likely to develop ankylosing spondylitis than are women.
Your age. Onset generally occurs in late adolescence or early adulthood.
Your heredity. Most people who have ankylosing spondylitis have the HLA-B27 gene. But many people who have this gene never develop ankylosing spondylitis.
In severe ankylosing spondylitis, new bone forms as part of the body's attempt to heal. This new bone gradually bridges the gap between vertebrae and eventually fuses sections of vertebrae. Those parts of your spine become stiff and inflexible. Fusion can also stiffen your rib cage, restricting your lung capacity and function.
Other complications might include:
Eye inflammation (uveitis). One of the most common complications of ankylosing spondylitis, uveitis can cause rapid-onset eye pain, sensitivity to light and blurred vision. See your doctor right away if you develop these symptoms.
Compression fractures. Some people's bones thin during the early stages of ankylosing spondylitis. Weakened vertebrae can crumble, increasing the severity of your stooped posture. Vertebral fractures can put pressure on and possibly injure the spinal cord and the nerves that pass through the spine.
Heart problems. Ankylosing spondylitis can cause problems with your aorta, the largest artery in your body. The inflamed aorta can enlarge to the point that it distorts the shape of the aortic valve in the heart, which impairs its function.
The physical signs and symptoms of anorexia nervosa are related to starvation. Anorexia also includes emotional and behavioral issues involving an unrealistic perception of body weight and an extremely strong fear of gaining weight or becoming fat.
It may be difficult to notice signs and symptoms because what is considered a low body weight is different for each person, and some individuals may not appear extremely thin. Also, people with anorexia often disguise their thinness, eating habits or physical problems.
Physical signs and symptoms of anorexia may include: Extreme weight loss or not making expected developmental weight gains, Thin appearance, Abnormal blood counts, Fatigue, Insomnia, Dizziness or fainting, Bluish discoloration of the fingers, Hair that thins, breaks or falls out, Soft, downy hair covering the body, Absence of menstruation, Constipation and abdominal pain, Dry or yellowish skin, Intolerance of cold, Irregular heart rhythms, Low blood pressure, Dehydration, Swelling of arms or legs, Eroded teeth and calluses on the knuckles from induced vomiting.
Some people who have anorexia binge and purge, similar to individuals who have bulimia. But people with anorexia generally struggle with an abnormally low body weight, while individuals with bulimia typically are normal to above normal weight.
Behavioral symptoms of anorexia may include attempts to lose weight by: Severely restricting food intake through dieting or fasting, Exercising excessively, Bingeing and self-induced vomiting to get rid of food, which may include the use of laxatives, enemas, diet aids or herbal products.
Emotional and behavioral signs and symptoms may include: Preoccupation with food, which sometimes includes cooking elaborate meals for others but not eating them, Frequently skipping meals or refusing to eat, Denial of hunger or making excuses for not eating, Eating only a few certain "safe" foods, usually those low in fat and calories, Adopting rigid meal or eating rituals, such as spitting food out after chewing, Not wanting to eat in public, Lying about how much food has been eaten, Fear of gaining weight that may include repeated weighing or measuring the body, Frequent checking in the mirror for perceived flaws, Complaining about being fat or having parts of the body that are fat, Covering up in layers of clothing, Flat mood (lack of emotion), Social withdrawal, Irritability, Insomnia, Reduced interest in sex.
Unfortunately, many people with anorexia don't want treatment, at least initially. Their desire to remain thin overrides concerns about their health. If you have a loved one you're worried about, urge her or him to talk to a doctor.
If you're experiencing any of the problems listed above, or if you think you may have an eating disorder, get help. If you're hiding your anorexia from loved ones, try to find a person you trust to talk to about what's going on.
The exact cause of anorexia is unknown. As with many diseases, it's probably a combination of biological, psychological and environmental factors.
Biological. Although it's not yet clear which genes are involved, there may be genetic changes that make some people at higher risk of developing anorexia. Some people may have a genetic tendency toward perfectionism, sensitivity and perseverance — all traits associated with anorexia.
Psychological. Some people with anorexia may have obsessive-compulsive personality traits that make it easier to stick to strict diets and forgo food despite being hungry. They may have an extreme drive for perfectionism, which causes them to think they're never thin enough. And they may have high levels of anxiety and engage in restrictive eating to reduce it.
Environmental. Modern Western culture emphasizes thinness. Success and worth are often equated with being thin. Peer pressure may help fuel the desire to be thin, particularly among young girls.
Anorexia is more common in girls and women. However, boys and men have increasingly developed eating disorders, possibly related to growing social pressures.
Anorexia is also more common among teenagers. Still, people of any age can develop this eating disorder, though it's rare in those over 40. Teens may be more at risk because of all the changes their bodies go through during puberty. They may also face increased peer pressure and be more sensitive to criticism or even casual comments about weight or body shape.
Certain factors increase the risk of anorexia, including:
Genetics. Changes in specific genes may put certain people at higher risk of anorexia. Those with a first-degree relative — a parent, sibling or child — who had the disorder have a much higher risk of anorexia.
Dieting and starvation. Dieting is a risk factor for developing an eating disorder. There is strong evidence that many of the symptoms of anorexia are actually symptoms of starvation. Starvation affects the brain and influences mood changes, rigidity in thinking, anxiety and reduction in appetite. Starvation and weight loss may change the way the brain works in vulnerable individuals, which may perpetuate restrictive eating behaviors and make it difficult to return to normal eating habits.
Transitions. Whether it's a new school, home or job; a relationship breakup; or the death or illness of a loved one, change can bring emotional stress and increase the risk of anorexia.
Anorexia can have numerous complications. At its most severe, it can be fatal. Death may occur suddenly — even when someone is not severely underweight. This may result from abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias) or an imbalance of electrolytes — minerals such as sodium, potassium and calcium that maintain the balance of fluids in your body.
Other complications of anorexia include: Anemia, Heart problems, such as mitral valve prolapse, abnormal heart rhythms or heart failure, Bone loss (osteoporosis), increasing the risk of fractures, Loss of muscle, In females, absence of a period, In males, decreased testosterone, Gastrointestinal problems, such as constipation, bloating or nausea, Electrolyte abnormalities, such as low blood potassium, sodium and chloride, Kidney problems.
If a person with anorexia becomes severely malnourished, every organ in the body can be damaged, including the brain, heart and kidneys. This damage may not be fully reversible, even when the anorexia is under control.
In addition to the host of physical complications, people with anorexia also commonly have other mental health disorders as well. They may include: Depression, anxiety and other mood disorders, Personality disorders, Obsessive-compulsive disorders, Alcohol and substance misuse, Self-injury, suicidal thoughts or suicide attempts.
An orgasm is a feeling of intense physical pleasure and release of tension, accompanied by involuntary, rhythmic contractions of your pelvic floor muscles. But it doesn't always look — or sound — like it does in the movies. The way an orgasm feels varies among women, and in an individual, it can differ from orgasm to orgasm.
By definition, the major symptoms of anorgasmia are the inability to have an orgasm or long delays in reaching orgasm that's distressing to you. But there are different types of anorgasmia:
Lifelong anorgasmia. You've never had an orgasm.
Acquired anorgasmia. You used to have orgasms, but now have difficulty reaching climax.
Situational anorgasmia. You're able to have an orgasm only in certain circumstances, such as during oral sex or masturbation or only with a certain partner.
Generalized anorgasmia. You aren't able to have an orgasm in any situation or with any partner.
Talk to your doctor if you have questions about orgasm or concerns about your ability to reach orgasm.
Orgasm is a complex reaction to various physical, emotional and psychological factors. Difficulties in any of these areas can affect your ability to orgasm.
A wide range of illnesses, physical changes and medications can interfere with orgasm:
Diseases. Serious illnesses, such as multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease, and their associated affects on psychological well-being can hamper orgasm.
Gynecological issues. Gynecologic surgeries, such as hysterectomy or cancer surgeries, can affect orgasm. Also, lack of orgasm often goes with other sexual concerns, such as uncomfortable or painful intercourse.
Medications. Many prescription and over-the-counter medications can inhibit orgasm, including blood pressure medications, antipsychotic drugs, antihistamines and antidepressants — particularly selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
Alcohol and smoking. Too much alcohol can hamper your ability to climax. Smoking can limit blood flow to your sexual organs.
Aging. As you age, normal changes in your anatomy, hormones, neurological system and circulatory system can affect your sexuality. Waning estrogen levels as you transition to menopause and menopausal symptoms, such as night sweats and mood changes, can have an impact on sexuality.
Many psychological factors play a role in your ability to orgasm, including: Mental health problems, such as anxiety or depression, Poor body image, Stress and financial pressures, Cultural and religious beliefs, Embarrassment, Guilt about enjoying sex, Past sexual or emotional abuse.
Couples' problems outside of the bedroom can affect their sexual relationship. Issues might include: Lack of connection with your partner, Unresolved conflicts, Poor communication of sexual needs and preferences, Infidelity or breach of trust, Intimate partner violence.
In mild cases of anterior prolapse, you may not notice any signs or symptoms. When signs and symptoms occur, they may include: A feeling of fullness or pressure in your pelvis and vagina, In some cases, a bulge of tissue in your vagina that you can see or feel, Increased pelvic pressure when you strain, cough, bear down or lift, Problems urinating, including difficulty starting a urine stream, the feeling that you haven't completely emptied your bladder after urinating, feeling a frequent need to urinate or leaking urine (urinary incontinence).
Signs and symptoms often are especially noticeable after standing for long periods of time and may go away when you lie down.
A prolapsed bladder can be uncomfortable, but it is rarely painful. It can make emptying your bladder difficult, which may lead to bladder infections. Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that bother you or impact your daily activities.
Your pelvic floor consists of muscles, ligaments and connective tissues that support your bladder and other pelvic organs. The connections between your pelvic organs and ligaments can weaken over time, or as a result of trauma from childbirth or chronic straining. When this happens, your bladder can slip down lower than normal and bulge into your vagina (anterior prolapse).
Causes of stress to the pelvic floor include: Pregnancy and vaginal childbirth, Being overweight or obese, Repeated heavy lifting, Straining with bowel movements, A chronic cough or bronchitis.
These factors may increase your risk of anterior prolapse:
Pregnancy and childbirth. Women who have had a vaginal or instrument-assisted delivery, multiple pregnancies, or whose infants had a high birth weight have a higher risk of anterior prolapse.
Aging. Your risk of anterior prolapse increases as you age. This is especially true after menopause, when your body's production of estrogen — which helps keep the pelvic floor strong — decreases.
Hysterectomy. Having your uterus removed may contribute to weakness in your pelvic floor, but this is not always the case.
Genetics. Some women are born with weaker connective tissues, making them more susceptible to anterior prolapse.
Obesity. Women who are overweight or obese are at higher risk of anterior prolapse.
There are four common routes of anthrax infection, each with different signs and symptoms. In most cases, symptoms develop within six days of exposure to the bacteria. However, it's possible for inhalation anthrax symptoms to take more than six weeks to appear.
A skin-related (cutaneous) anthrax infection enters your body through your skin, usually through a cut or other sore. It's by far the most common route of the disease. It's also the mildest. With appropriate treatment, cutaneous anthrax is seldom fatal. Signs and symptoms include: A raised, itchy bump resembling an insect bite that quickly develops into a painless sore with a black center, Swelling in the sore and nearby lymph glands, Sometimes, flu-like symptoms including fever and headache.
A gastrointestinal anthrax infection results from eating undercooked meat from an infected animal. It can affect your gastrointestinal tract from your throat to your colon. Signs and symptoms include: Nausea, Vomiting, Abdominal pain, Headache, Loss of appetite, Fever, Severe, bloody diarrhea in the later stages of the disease, Sore throat and difficulty swallowing, Swollen neck.
Inhalation anthrax develops when you breathe in anthrax spores. It's the most deadly form of the disease, and is often fatal, even with treatment. Initial signs and symptoms include: Flu-like symptoms for a few hours or days, such as sore throat, mild fever, fatigue and muscle aches, Mild chest discomfort, Shortness of breath, Nausea, Coughing up blood, Painful swallowing, High fever, Trouble breathing, Shock — an acute medical condition involving collapse of the circulatory system, Meningitis.
This recently identified route of anthrax infection has so far been reported only in Europe. It's contracted through injecting illegal drugs. Initial signs and symptoms include: Redness at the area of injection (without an area that changes to black), Significant swelling, Shock, Multiple organ failure, Meningitis.
Many common illnesses start with symptoms that resemble the flu. The chances that your sore throat and aching muscles are due to anthrax are extremely small.
If you think you may have been exposed — for example, if you work in an environment where anthrax is likely to occur — see a doctor immediately for evaluation and care. If you develop signs and symptoms of the disorder after exposure to animals or animal products in parts of the world where anthrax is common, seek prompt medical attention. Early diagnosis and treatment are crucial.
Anthrax spores are formed by anthrax bacteria that occur naturally in soil in most parts of the world. The spores can remain dormant for years until they find their way into a host. Common hosts for anthrax include wild or domestic livestock, such as sheep, cattle, horses and goats.
Although rare in the United States, anthrax is still common throughout the developing world, in places such as Central America and South America, sub-Saharan Africa, Central Asia and southwestern Asia, southern Europe and Eastern Europe, and the Caribbean.
Most human cases of anthrax occur as a result of exposure to infected animals or their meat or hides. In the United States, a few people have developed anthrax while making traditional African drums from the skins of infected animals.
One of the few known instances of nonanimal transmission was a bioterrorism attack that occurred in the United States in 2001. Twenty-two people developed anthrax after being exposed to spores sent through the mail, and five of those infected died.
More recently, in two separate outbreaks, heroin users in Europe contracted anthrax through injecting illegal drugs. A total of 40 people died. Heroin sold in Europe likely comes from areas where naturally occurring anthrax is more common.
To contract anthrax, you must come in direct contact with anthrax spores. This is more likely if you: Are in the military and deployed to an area with a high risk of exposure to anthrax, Work with anthrax in a laboratory setting, Handle animal skins, furs or wool from areas with a high incidence of anthrax, Work in veterinary medicine, especially if you deal with livestock, Handle or dress game animals — while anthrax is rare in the United States, there are occasional outbreaks in domestic cattle and wild animals such as deer, Inject illegal drugs, such as heroin.
The most serious complications of anthrax include: Your body being unable to respond to infection normally, leading to damage of multiple organ systems (sepsis), Inflammation of the membranes and fluid covering the brain and spinal cord, leading to massive bleeding (hemorrhagic meningitis) and death.
For most people, antibiotic-associated diarrhea causes mild signs and symptoms, such as: Loose stools, More-frequent bowel movements.
Antibiotic-associated diarrhea is likely to begin about a week after you start taking an antibiotic. Sometimes, however, diarrhea and other symptoms don't appear until days or even weeks after you've finished antibiotic treatment.
C. difficile is a toxin-producing bacterium that can cause a more serious antibiotic-associated diarrhea. In addition to causing loose stools and more frequent bowel movements, C. difficile infection can cause: Lower abdominal pain and cramping, Low-grade fever, Nausea, Loss of appetite.
Call your doctor right away if you have serious signs and symptoms of antibiotic-associated diarrhea. These signs and symptoms are common to a number of conditions, so your doctor might recommend tests to determine the cause.
Why antibiotic-associated diarrhea occurs isn't completely understood. It's commonly thought to develop when antibacterial medications (antibiotics) upset the balance of good and bad bacteria in your gastrointestinal tract.
Nearly all antibiotics can cause antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Antibiotics most commonly involved include: Cephalosporins, such as cefdinir and cefpodoxime, Penicillins, such as amoxicillin and ampicillin.
When antibiotics upset the balance of bacteria in your digestive system, the bacteria C. difficile can quickly grow out of control. C. difficile bacteria create toxins that attack the lining of the intestine. The antibiotics most commonly linked to C. difficile infection include fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, penicillins and clindamycin.
Antibiotic-associated diarrhea can occur in anyone who takes an antibiotic. But you're more likely to develop antibiotic-associated diarrhea if you: Have had antibiotic-associated diarrhea in the past, Have taken antibiotic medications for an extended time, Are taking more than one antibiotic medication.
One of the most common complications of any type of diarrhea is extreme loss of fluids and electrolytes (dehydration). Severe dehydration can be life-threatening. Signs and symptoms include a very dry mouth, intense thirst, little or no urination, and weakness.
Signs and symptoms of antiphospholipid syndrome can include:
Blood clots in your legs (DVT). Signs of a DVT include pain, swelling and redness. These clots can travel to your lungs (pulmonary embolism).
Repeated miscarriages or stillbirths. Other complications of pregnancy include dangerously high blood pressure (preeclampsia) and premature delivery.
Stroke. A stroke can occur in a young person who has antiphospholipid syndrome but no known risk factors for cardiovascular diseases.
Transient ischemic attack (TIA). Similar to a stroke, a TIA usually lasts only a few minutes and causes no permanent damage.
Rash. Some people develop a red rash with a lacy, net-like pattern.
Less common signs and symptoms include:
Neurological symptoms. Chronic headaches, including migraines; dementia and seizures are possible when a blood clot blocks blood flow to parts of your brain.
Cardiovascular disease. Antiphospholipid syndrome can damage heart valves.
Bleeding. Some people have a decrease in blood cells needed for clotting. This can cause episodes of bleeding, particularly from your nose and gums. You can also bleed into your skin, which will appear as patches of small red spots.
Contact your doctor if you have unexplained bleeding from your nose or gums; an unusually heavy menstrual period; vomit that is bright red or looks like coffee grounds; black, tarry stool or bright red stool; or unexplained abdominal pain.
Seek emergency care if you have signs and symptoms of:
Stroke. A clot in your brain can cause sudden numbness, weakness or paralysis of your face, arm or leg. You may have difficulty speaking or understanding speech, visual disturbances and a severe headache.
Pulmonary embolism. If a clot lodges in your lung, you may experience sudden shortness of breath, chest pain and coughing up blood-streaked mucus.
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Signs and symptoms of DVTs include swelling, redness or pain in a leg or arm.
Antiphospholipid syndrome occurs when your immune system mistakenly produces antibodies that make your blood much more likely to clot. Antibodies normally protect the body against invaders, such as viruses and bacteria.
Antiphospholipid syndrome can be caused by an underlying condition, such as an autoimmune disorder, infection or certain medications. You also can develop the syndrome without an underlying cause.
Risk factors for antiphospholipid syndrome include:
Your sex. This condition is much more common in women than in men.
Immune system disorders. Having another autoimmune condition, such as lupus or Sjogren's syndrome, increases your risk of antiphospholipid syndrome.
Infections. This condition is more common in people who have certain infections, such as syphilis, HIV/AIDS, hepatitis C or Lyme disease.
Medications. Certain medications have been linked to antiphospholipid syndrome. They include hydralazine for high blood pressure, the heart rhythm-regulating medication quinidine, the anti-seizure medication phenytoin (Dilantin) and the antibiotic amoxicillin.
Family history. This condition sometimes runs in families.
It's possible to have the antibodies associated with antiphospholipid syndrome without developing signs or symptoms. However, having these antibodies increases your risk of developing blood clots, particularly if you: Become pregnant, Are immobile for a time, such as being on bed rest or sitting during a long flight, Have surgery, Smoke cigarettes, Take oral contraceptives or estrogen therapy for menopause, Have high cholesterol and triglycerides levels.
Depending on which organ is affected by a blood clot and how severe the obstruction of blood flow to that organ is, untreated antiphospholipid syndrome can lead to permanent organ damage or death. Complications include:
Kidney failure. This can result from decreased blood flow to your kidneys.
Stroke. Decreased blood flow to a part of your brain can cause a stroke, which can result in permanent neurological damage, such as partial paralysis and loss of speech.
Cardiovascular problems. A blood clot in your leg can damage the valves in the veins, which keep blood flowing to your heart. This can result in chronic swelling and discoloration in your lower legs. Another possible complication is heart damage.
Lung problems. These can include high blood pressure in your lungs and pulmonary embolism.
Pregnancy complications. These can include miscarriages, stillbirths, premature delivery, slow fetal growth and dangerously high blood pressure during pregnancy (preeclampsia).
Rarely, a person can have repeated clotting events in a short time, leading to progressive damage in multiple organs.
Antisocial personality disorder signs and symptoms may include: Disregard for right and wrong, Persistent lying or deceit to exploit others, Being callous, cynical and disrespectful of others, Using charm or wit to manipulate others for personal gain or personal pleasure, Arrogance, a sense of superiority and being extremely opinionated, Recurring problems with the law, including criminal behavior, Repeatedly violating the rights of others through intimidation and dishonesty, Impulsiveness or failure to plan ahead, Hostility, significant irritability, agitation, aggression or violence, Lack of empathy for others and lack of remorse about harming others, Unnecessary risk-taking or dangerous behavior with no regard for the safety of self or others, Poor or abusive relationships, Failure to consider the negative consequences of behavior or learn from them, Being consistently irresponsible and repeatedly failing to fulfill work or financial obligations.
Adults with antisocial personality disorder typically show symptoms of conduct disorder before the age of 15. Signs and symptoms of conduct disorder include serious, persistent behavior problems, such as: Aggression toward people and animals, Destruction of property, Deceitfulness, Theft, Serious violation of rules.
Although antisocial personality disorder is considered lifelong, in some people, certain symptoms — particularly destructive and criminal behavior — may decrease over time. But it's not clear whether this decrease is a result of aging or an increased awareness of the consequences of antisocial behavior.
People with antisocial personality disorder are unlikely to seek help on their own. If you suspect that a friend or family member may have the disorder, you might gently suggest that the person seek help from a mental health professional and offer to help them find one.
Personality is the combination of thoughts, emotions and behaviors that makes everyone unique. It's the way people view, understand and relate to the outside world, as well as how they see themselves. Personality forms during childhood, shaped through an interaction of inherited tendencies and environmental factors.
The exact cause of antisocial personality disorder isn't known, but: Genes may make you vulnerable to developing antisocial personality disorder — and life situations may trigger its development, Changes in the way the brain functions may have resulted during brain development.
Certain factors seem to increase the risk of developing antisocial personality disorder, such as: Diagnosis of childhood conduct disorder, Family history of antisocial personality disorder or other personality disorders or mental health disorders, Being subjected to abuse or neglect during childhood, Unstable, violent or chaotic family life during childhood.
Men are at greater risk of having antisocial personality disorder than women are.
Complications, consequences and problems of antisocial personality disorder may include, for example: Spouse abuse or child abuse or neglect, Problems with alcohol or substance use, Being in jail or prison, Homicidal or suicidal behaviors, Having other mental health disorders such as depression or anxiety, Low social and economic status and homelessness, Premature death, usually as a result of violence.
Common anxiety signs and symptoms include: Feeling nervous, restless or tense, Having a sense of impending danger, panic or doom, Having an increased heart rate, Breathing rapidly (hyperventilation), Sweating, Trembling, Feeling weak or tired, Trouble concentrating or thinking about anything other than the present worry, Having trouble sleeping, Experiencing gastrointestinal (GI) problems, Having difficulty controlling worry, Having the urge to avoid things that trigger anxiety.
Several types of anxiety disorders exist:
Agoraphobia (ag-uh-ruh-FOE-be-uh) is a type of anxiety disorder in which you fear and often avoid places or situations that might cause you to panic and make you feel trapped, helpless or embarrassed.
Anxiety disorder due to a medical condition includes symptoms of intense anxiety or panic that are directly caused by a physical health problem.
Generalized anxiety disorder includes persistent and excessive anxiety and worry about activities or events — even ordinary, routine issues. The worry is out of proportion to the actual circumstance, is difficult to control and affects how you feel physically. It often occurs along with other anxiety disorders or depression.
Panic disorder involves repeated episodes of sudden feelings of intense anxiety and fear or terror that reach a peak within minutes (panic attacks). You may have feelings of impending doom, shortness of breath, chest pain, or a rapid, fluttering or pounding heart (heart palpitations). These panic attacks may lead to worrying about them happening again or avoiding situations in which they've occurred.
Selective mutism is a consistent failure of children to speak in certain situations, such as school, even when they can speak in other situations, such as at home with close family members. This can interfere with school, work and social functioning.
Separation anxiety disorder is a childhood disorder characterized by anxiety that's excessive for the child's developmental level and related to separation from parents or others who have parental roles.
Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) involves high levels of anxiety, fear and avoidance of social situations due to feelings of embarrassment, self-consciousness and concern about being judged or viewed negatively by others.
Specific phobias are characterized by major anxiety when you're exposed to a specific object or situation and a desire to avoid it. Phobias provoke panic attacks in some people.
Substance-induced anxiety disorder is characterized by symptoms of intense anxiety or panic that are a direct result of misusing drugs, taking medications, being exposed to a toxic substance or withdrawal from drugs.
Other specified anxiety disorder and unspecified anxiety disorder are terms for anxiety or phobias that don't meet the exact criteria for any other anxiety disorders but are significant enough to be distressing and disruptive.
See your doctor if: You feel like you're worrying too much and it's interfering with your work, relationships or other parts of your life, Your fear, worry or anxiety is upsetting to you and difficult to control, You feel depressed, have trouble with alcohol or drug use, or have other mental health concerns along with anxiety, You think your anxiety could be linked to a physical health problem, You have suicidal thoughts or behaviors — if this is the case, seek emergency treatment immediately.
Your worries may not go away on their own, and they may get worse over time if you don't seek help. See your doctor or a mental health provider before your anxiety gets worse. It's easier to treat if you get help early.
The causes of anxiety disorders aren't fully understood. Life experiences such as traumatic events appear to trigger anxiety disorders in people who are already prone to anxiety. Inherited traits also can be a factor.
For some people, anxiety may be linked to an underlying health issue. In some cases, anxiety signs and symptoms are the first indicators of a medical illness. If your doctor suspects your anxiety may have a medical cause, he or she may order tests to look for signs of a problem.
Examples of medical problems that can be linked to anxiety include: Heart disease, Diabetes, Thyroid problems, such as hyperthyroidism, Respiratory disorders, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma, Drug misuse or withdrawal, Withdrawal from alcohol, anti-anxiety medications (benzodiazepines) or other medications, Chronic pain or irritable bowel syndrome, Rare tumors that produce certain fight-or-flight hormones.
Sometimes anxiety can be a side effect of certain medications.
It's possible that your anxiety may be due to an underlying medical condition if: You don't have any blood relatives (such as a parent or sibling) with an anxiety disorder, You didn't have an anxiety disorder as a child, You don't avoid certain things or situations because of anxiety, You have a sudden occurrence of anxiety that seems unrelated to life events and you didn't have a previous history of anxiety.
These factors may increase your risk of developing an anxiety disorder:
Trauma. Children who endured abuse or trauma or witnessed traumatic events are at higher risk of developing an anxiety disorder at some point in life. Adults who experience a traumatic event also can develop anxiety disorders.
Stress due to an illness. Having a health condition or serious illness can cause significant worry about issues such as your treatment and your future.
Stress buildup. A big event or a buildup of smaller stressful life situations may trigger excessive anxiety — for example, a death in the family, work stress or ongoing worry about finances.
Personality. People with certain personality types are more prone to anxiety disorders than others are.
Other mental health disorders. People with other mental health disorders, such as depression, often also have an anxiety disorder.
Having blood relatives with an anxiety disorder. Anxiety disorders can run in families.
Drugs or alcohol. Drug or alcohol use or misuse or withdrawal can cause or worsen anxiety.
Having an anxiety disorder does more than make you worry. It can also lead to, or worsen, other mental and physical conditions, such as: Depression (which often occurs with an anxiety disorder) or other mental health disorders, Substance misuse, Trouble sleeping (insomnia), Digestive or bowel problems, Headaches and chronic pain, Social isolation, Problems functioning at school or work, Poor quality of life, Suicide.
Aortic dissection symptoms may be similar to those of other heart problems, such as a heart attack. Typical signs and symptoms include: Sudden severe chest or upper back pain, often described as a tearing, ripping or shearing sensation, that radiates to the neck or down the back, Sudden severe abdominal pain, Loss of consciousness, Shortness of breath, Sudden difficulty speaking, loss of vision, weakness or paralysis of one side of your body, similar to those of a stroke, Weak pulse in one arm or thigh compared with the other, Leg pain, Difficulty walking, Leg paralysis.
If you have signs or symptoms such as severe chest pain, fainting, sudden onset of shortness of breath or symptoms of a stroke, call 911 or emergency medical assistance. These signs and symptoms don't always indicate a serious problem, but it's best to get checked quickly. Early detection and treatment may help save your life.
An aortic dissection occurs in a weakened area of the aortic wall. Chronic high blood pressure may stress the aortic tissue, making it more susceptible to tearing. You can also be born with a condition associated with a weakened and enlarged aorta, such as Marfan syndrome, bicuspid aortic valve or other rarer conditions associated with weakening of the walls of the blood vessels. Rarely, aortic dissections are caused by traumatic injury to the chest area, such as during motor vehicle accidents.
Aortic dissections are divided into two groups, depending on which part of the aorta is affected:
Type A. This more common and dangerous type involves a tear in the part of the aorta where it exits the heart or a tear in the upper aorta (ascending aorta), which may extend into the abdomen.
Type B. This involves a tear in the lower aorta only (descending aorta), which may also extend into the abdomen.
Risk factors for aortic dissection include: Uncontrolled high blood pressure (hypertension), Hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis), Weakened and bulging artery (pre-existing aortic aneurysm), An aortic valve defect (bicuspid aortic valve), A narrowing of the aorta at birth (aortic coarctation).
Certain genetic diseases increase the risk of having an aortic dissection, including:
Turner's syndrome. High blood pressure, heart problems and a number of other health conditions may result from this disorder.
Marfan syndrome. This is a condition in which connective tissue, which supports various structures in the body, is weak. People with this disorder often have a family history of aneurysms of the aorta and other blood vessels or family history of aortic dissections.
Other connective tissue disorders. This includes Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, a group of connective tissue disorders characterized by skin that bruises or tears easily, loose joints and fragile blood vessels and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, with twisted arteries, especially in the neck.
Inflammatory or infectious conditions. These may include giant cell arteritis, which is an inflammation of the arteries, and syphilis, a sexually transmitted infection.
Other potential risk factors include:
Sex. Men have about double the incidence of aortic dissection.
Age. The incidence of aortic dissection peaks in the 60s and 80s.
Cocaine use. This drug may be a risk factor for aortic dissection because it temporarily raises blood pressure.
Pregnancy. Infrequently, aortic dissections occur in otherwise healthy women during pregnancy.
High-intensity weightlifting. This and other strenuous resistance training may increase the risk of aortic dissection by increasing blood pressure during the activity.
An aortic dissection can lead to: Death due to severe internal bleeding, Organ damage, such as kidney failure or life-threatening intestinal damage, Stroke, Aortic valve damage (aortic regurgitation) or rupture into the lining around the heart (cardiac tamponade).
Some people with aortic valve disease may not experience symptoms for many years. Signs and symptoms of aortic valve disease may include: Abnormal heart sound (heart murmur) heard through a stethoscope, Shortness of breath, particularly when you have been very active or when you lie down, Dizziness, Fainting, Chest pain or tightness, Irregular heartbeat, Fatigue after being active or having less ability to be active, Not eating enough (mainly in children with aortic valve stenosis), Not gaining enough weight (mainly in children with aortic valve stenosis).
If you have a heart murmur, your doctor may recommend that you visit a cardiologist or have a test called an echocardiogram (ultrasound of the heart). If you develop any symptoms that may suggest aortic valve disease, see your doctor.
Your heart has four valves that keep blood flowing in the correct direction. These valves include the mitral valve, tricuspid valve, pulmonary valve and aortic valve. Each valve has flaps (cusps or leaflets) that open and close once during each heartbeat. Sometimes, the valves don't open or close properly, disrupting the blood flow through your heart and potentially impairing the ability to pump blood to your body.
In aortic valve disease, the aortic valve between the lower left heart chamber (left ventricle) and the main artery that delivers blood from the heart to the body (aorta) doesn't work properly. It may not be closing properly, which causes blood to leak backward to the left ventricle (regurgitation), or the valve may be narrowed (stenosis).
Aortic valve disease may be caused by a heart defect present at birth (congenital). It can also be caused by other conditions, including age-related changes to the heart, infections, high blood pressure or injury to the heart.
Risk factors of aortic valve disease include: Older age, Certain heart conditions present at birth (congenital heart disease), History of infections that can affect the heart, Chronic kidney disease, History of radiation therapy to the chest.
Aortic valve disease can cause complications, including: Heart failure, Stroke, Blood clots, Heart rhythm abnormalities, Death.
Most often, aortic valve regurgitation develops gradually, and your heart compensates for the problem. You may have no signs or symptoms for years, and you may even be unaware that you have the condition.
However, as aortic valve regurgitation worsens, signs and symptoms may include: Fatigue and weakness, especially when you increase your activity level, Shortness of breath with exercise or when you lie down, Swollen ankles and feet, Chest pain (angina), discomfort or tightness, often increasing during exercise, Lightheadedness or fainting, Irregular pulse (arrhythmia), Heart murmur, Sensations of a rapid, fluttering heartbeat (palpitations).
Contact your doctor right away if signs and symptoms of aortic valve regurgitation develop. Sometimes the first indications of aortic valve regurgitation are those of its major complication, heart failure. See your doctor if you have fatigue, shortness of breath, and swollen ankles and feet, which are common symptoms of heart failure.
Your heart has four valves that keep blood flowing in the correct direction. These valves include the mitral valve, tricuspid valve, pulmonary valve and aortic valve. Each valve has flaps (cusps or leaflets) that open and close once during each heartbeat. Sometimes, the valves don't open or close properly, disrupting the blood flow through your heart and potentially impairing the ability to pump blood to your body.
In aortic valve regurgitation, the valve between the lower left heart chamber (left ventricle) and the main artery that leads to the body (aorta) doesn't close properly, which causes some blood to leak backward into the left ventricle. This forces the left ventricle to hold more blood, possibly causing it to enlarge and thicken.
At first, left ventricle enlargement helps because it maintains adequate blood flow with more force. But eventually these changes weaken the left ventricle — and your heart overall.
Any condition that damages a valve can cause regurgitation. Causes of aortic valve regurgitation include:
Congenital heart valve disease. You may have been born with an aortic valve that has only two cusps (bicuspid valve) or fused cusps rather than the normal three separate cusps. In some cases a valve may only have one cusp (unicuspid) or four cusps (quadricuspid), but this is less common.
These congenital heart defects put you at risk of developing aortic valve regurgitation at some time in your life. If you have a parent or sibling with a bicuspid valve, it increases the risk that you may have a bicuspid valve, but it can also occur if you don't have a family history of a bicuspid aortic valve.
Age-related changes to the heart. Calcium deposits can build up on the aortic valve over time, causing the aortic valve's cusps to stiffen. This can cause the aortic valve to become narrow, and it may also not close properly.
Endocarditis. The aortic valve may be damaged by endocarditis — an infection inside your heart that involves heart valves.
Rheumatic fever. Rheumatic fever — a complication of strep throat and once a common childhood illness in the United States — can damage the aortic valve. Rheumatic fever is still prevalent in developing countries but rare in the United States. Some older adults in the United States were exposed to rheumatic fever as children, although they may not have developed rheumatic heart disease.
Other diseases. Other rare conditions can enlarge the aorta and aortic valve and lead to regurgitation, including Marfan syndrome, a connective tissue disease. Some autoimmune conditions, such as lupus, also can lead to aortic valve regurgitation.
Trauma. Damage to the aorta near the site of the aortic valve, such as damage from injury to your chest or from a tear in the aorta, also can cause backward flow of blood through the valve.
Risk factors of aortic valve regurgitation include: Older age, Certain heart conditions present at birth (congenital heart disease), History of infections that can affect the heart, Certain conditions that can affect the heart, such as Marfan syndrome, Other heart valve conditions, such as aortic valve stenosis, High blood pressure.
Aortic valve regurgitation can cause complications, including: Heart failure, Infections that affect the heart, such as endocarditis, Heart rhythm abnormalities, Death.
Aortic valve stenosis ranges from mild to severe. Aortic valve stenosis signs and symptoms generally develop when narrowing of the valve is severe. Some people with aortic valve stenosis may not experience symptoms for many years. Signs and symptoms of aortic valve stenosis may include: Abnormal heart sound (heart murmur) heard through a stethoscope, Chest pain (angina) or tightness with activity, Feeling faint or dizzy or fainting with activity, Shortness of breath, especially when you have been active, Fatigue, especially during times of increased activity, Heart palpitations — sensations of a rapid, fluttering heartbeat, Not eating enough (mainly in children with aortic valve stenosis), Not gaining enough weight (mainly in children with aortic valve stenosis).
The heart-weakening effects of aortic valve stenosis may lead to heart failure. Heart failure signs and symptoms include fatigue, shortness of breath, and swollen ankles and feet.
If you have a heart murmur, your doctor may recommend that you visit a cardiologist. If you develop any symptoms that may suggest aortic valve stenosis, see your doctor.
Your heart has four valves that keep blood flowing in the correct direction. These valves include the mitral valve, tricuspid valve, pulmonary valve and aortic valve. Each valve has flaps (cusps or leaflets) that open and close once during each heartbeat. Sometimes, the valves don't open or close properly, disrupting the blood flow through your heart and potentially impairing the ability to pump blood to your body.
In aortic valve stenosis, the aortic valve between the lower left heart chamber (left ventricle) and the main artery that delivers blood from the heart to the body (aorta) is narrowed (stenosis).
When the aortic valve is narrowed, the left ventricle has to work harder to pump a sufficient amount of blood into the aorta and onward to the rest of your body. This can cause the left ventricle to thicken and enlarge. Eventually the extra work of the heart can weaken the left ventricle and your heart overall, and it can ultimately lead to heart failure and other problems.
Aortic valve stenosis can occur due to many causes, including:
Congenital heart defect. The aortic valve consists of three tightly fitting, triangular-shaped flaps of tissue called cusps. Some children are born with an aortic valve that has only two (bicuspid) cusps instead of three. People may also be born with one (unicuspid) or four (quadricuspid) cusps, but these are rare.
This defect may not cause any problems until adulthood, at which time the valve may begin to narrow or leak and may need to be repaired or replaced.
Having a congenitally abnormal aortic valve requires regular evaluation by a doctor to watch for signs of valve problems. In most cases, doctors don't know why a heart valve fails to develop properly, so it isn't something you could have prevented.
Calcium buildup on the valve. With age, heart valves may accumulate deposits of calcium (aortic valve calcification). Calcium is a mineral found in your blood. As blood repeatedly flows over the aortic valve, deposits of calcium can build up on the valve's cusps. These calcium deposits aren't linked to taking calcium tablets or drinking calcium-fortified drinks.
These deposits may never cause any problems. However, in some people — particularly those with a congenitally abnormal aortic valve, such as a bicuspid aortic valve — calcium deposits result in stiffening of the cusps of the valve. This stiffening narrows the aortic valve and can occur at a younger age.
However, aortic valve stenosis that is related to increasing age and the buildup of calcium deposits on the aortic valve is most common in older people. It usually doesn't cause symptoms until ages 70 or 80.
Rheumatic fever. A complication of strep throat infection, rheumatic fever may result in scar tissue forming on the aortic valve. Scar tissue alone can narrow the aortic valve and lead to aortic valve stenosis. Scar tissue can also create a rough surface on which calcium deposits can collect, contributing to aortic valve stenosis later in life.
Rheumatic fever may damage more than one heart valve, and in more than one way. A damaged heart valve may not open fully or close fully — or both. While rheumatic fever is rare in the United States, some older adults had rheumatic fever as children.
Risk factors of aortic valve stenosis include: Older age, Certain heart conditions present at birth (congenital heart disease) such as a bicuspid aortic valve, History of infections that can affect the heart, Having cardiovascular risk factors, such as diabetes, high cholesterol and high blood pressure, Chronic kidney disease, History of radiation therapy to the chest.
Aortic valve stenosis can cause complications, including: Heart failure, Stroke, Blood clots, Bleeding, Heart rhythm abnormalities (arrhythmias), Infections that affect the heart, such as endocarditis, Death.
Aphasia is a sign of some other condition, such as a stroke or a brain tumor.
A person with aphasia may: Speak in short or incomplete sentences, Speak in sentences that don't make sense, Substitute one word for another or one sound for another, Speak unrecognizable words, Not understand other people's conversation, Write sentences that don't make sense.
People with aphasia may have different patterns of strengths and weaknesses.
Expressive aphasia. This is also called Broca's or nonfluent aphasia. People with this pattern of aphasia may understand what other people say better than they can speak. People with this pattern of aphasia struggle to get words out, speak in very short sentences and omit words. A person might say, "Want food" or "Walk park today."
A listener can usually understand the meaning, but people with this aphasia pattern are often aware of their difficulty communicating and may get frustrated. They may also have right-sided paralysis or weakness.
Comprehensive aphasia. People with this pattern of aphasia (also called fluent or Wernicke's aphasia) may speak easily and fluently in long, complex sentences that don't make sense or include unrecognizable, incorrect or unnecessary words. They usually don't understand spoken language well and often don't realize that others can't understand them.
Global aphasia. This aphasia pattern is characterized by poor comprehension and difficulty forming words and sentences. Global aphasia results from extensive damage to the brain's language networks. People with global aphasia have severe disabilities with expression and comprehension.
Because aphasia is often a sign of a serious problem, such as a stroke, seek emergency medical care if you suddenly develop: Difficulty speaking, Trouble understanding speech, Difficulty with word recall, Problems with reading or writing.
The most common cause of aphasia is brain damage resulting from a stroke — the blockage or rupture of a blood vessel in the brain. Loss of blood to the brain leads to brain cell death or damage in areas that control language.
Brain damage caused by a severe head injury, a tumor, an infection or a degenerative process also can cause aphasia. In these cases, the aphasia usually occurs with other types of cognitive problems, such as memory problems or confusion.
Primary progressive aphasia is the term used for language difficulty that develops gradually. This is due to the gradual degeneration of brain cells located in the language networks. Sometimes this type of aphasia will progress to a more generalized dementia.
Sometimes temporary episodes of aphasia can occur. These can be due to migraines, seizures or a transient ischemic attack (TIA). A TIA occurs when blood flow is temporarily blocked to an area of the brain. People who've had a TIA are at an increased risk of having a stroke in the near future.
Aphasia can create numerous quality-of-life problems because communication is so much a part of your life. Communication difficulty may affect your: Job, Relationships, Day-to-day function.
Language barriers may lead to embarrassment, depression and relationship problems.
Aplastic anemia can have no symptoms. When present, signs and symptoms can include: Fatigue, Shortness of breath, Rapid or irregular heart rate, Pale skin, Frequent or prolonged infections, Unexplained or easy bruising, Nosebleeds and bleeding gums, Prolonged bleeding from cuts, Skin rash, Dizziness, Headache, Fever.
Aplastic anemia can be short-lived, or it can become chronic. It can be severe and even fatal.
Stem cells in the bone marrow produce blood cells — red cells, white cells and platelets. In aplastic anemia, stem cells are damaged. As a result, the bone marrow is either empty (aplastic) or contains few blood cells (hypoplastic).
The most common cause of aplastic anemia is from your immune system attacking the stem cells in your bone marrow. Other factors that can injure bone marrow and affect blood cell production include:
Radiation and chemotherapy treatments. While these cancer-fighting therapies kill cancer cells, they can also damage healthy cells, including stem cells in bone marrow. Aplastic anemia can be a temporary side effect of these treatments.
Exposure to toxic chemicals. Toxic chemicals, such as some used in pesticides and insecticides, and benzene, an ingredient in gasoline, have been linked to aplastic anemia. This type of anemia might improve if you avoid repeated exposure to the chemicals that caused your illness.
Use of certain drugs. Some medications, such as those used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and some antibiotics, can cause aplastic anemia.
Autoimmune disorders. An autoimmune disorder, in which your immune system attacks healthy cells, might involve stem cells in your bone marrow.
A viral infection. Viral infections that affect bone marrow can play a role in the development of aplastic anemia. Viruses that have been linked to aplastic anemia include hepatitis, Epstein-Barr, cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19 and HIV.
Pregnancy. Your immune system might attack your bone marrow during pregnancy.
Unknown factors. In many cases, doctors aren't able to identify the cause of aplastic anemia (idiopathic aplastic anemia).
Some people with aplastic anemia also have a rare disorder known as paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, which causes red blood cells to break down too soon. This condition can lead to aplastic anemia, or aplastic anemia can evolve into paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Fanconi's anemia is a rare, inherited disease that leads to aplastic anemia. Children born with it tend to be smaller than average and have birth defects, such as underdeveloped limbs. The disease is diagnosed with the help of blood tests.
Aplastic anemia is rare. Factors that can increase risk include: Treatment with high-dose radiation or chemotherapy for cancer, Exposure to toxic chemicals, The use of some prescription drugs — such as chloramphenicol, which is used to treat bacterial infections, and gold compounds used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, Certain blood diseases, autoimmune disorders and serious infections, Pregnancy, rarely.
Signs and symptoms of appendicitis may include: Sudden pain that begins on the right side of the lower abdomen, Sudden pain that begins around your navel and often shifts to your lower right abdomen, Pain that worsens if you cough, walk or make other jarring movements, Nausea and vomiting, Loss of appetite, Low-grade fever that may worsen as the illness progresses, Constipation or diarrhea, Abdominal bloating, Flatulence.
The site of your pain may vary, depending on your age and the position of your appendix. When you're pregnant, the pain may seem to come from your upper abdomen because your appendix is higher during pregnancy.
Make an appointment with a doctor if you or your child has worrisome signs or symptoms. Severe abdominal pain requires immediate medical attention.
A blockage in the lining of the appendix that results in infection is the likely cause of appendicitis. The bacteria multiply rapidly, causing the appendix to become inflamed, swollen and filled with pus. If not treated promptly, the appendix can rupture.
Appendicitis can cause serious complications, such as:
A ruptured appendix. A rupture spreads infection throughout your abdomen (peritonitis). Possibly life-threatening, this condition requires immediate surgery to remove the appendix and clean your abdominal cavity.
A pocket of pus that forms in the abdomen. If your appendix bursts, you may develop a pocket of infection (abscess). In most cases, a surgeon drains the abscess by placing a tube through your abdominal wall into the abscess. The tube is left in place for about two weeks, and you're given antibiotics to clear the infection.
Once the infection is clear, you'll have surgery to remove the appendix. In some cases, the abscess is drained, and the appendix is removed immediately.
The signs and symptoms of ARDS can vary in intensity, depending on its cause and severity, as well as the presence of underlying heart or lung disease. They include: Severe shortness of breath, Labored and unusually rapid breathing, Low blood pressure, Confusion and extreme tiredness.
ARDS usually follows a major illness or injury, and most people who are affected are already hospitalized.
The mechanical cause of ARDS is fluid leaked from the smallest blood vessels in the lungs into the tiny air sacs where blood is oxygenated. Normally, a protective membrane keeps this fluid in the vessels. Severe illness or injury, however, can cause damage to the membrane, leading to the fluid leakage of ARDS.
Underlying causes of ARDS include:
Sepsis. The most common cause of ARDS is sepsis, a serious and widespread infection of the bloodstream.
Inhalation of harmful substances. Breathing high concentrations of smoke or chemical fumes can result in ARDS, as can inhaling (aspirating) vomit or near-drowning episodes.
Severe pneumonia. Severe cases of pneumonia usually affect all five lobes of the lungs.
Head, chest or other major injury. Accidents, such as falls or car crashes, can directly damage the lungs or the portion of the brain that controls breathing.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). People who have severe COVID-19 may develop ARDS.
Others. Pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas), massive blood transfusions and burns.
Most people who develop ARDS are already hospitalized for another condition, and many are critically ill. You're especially at risk if you have a widespread infection in your bloodstream (sepsis).
People who have a history of chronic alcoholism are at higher risk of developing ARDS. They're also more likely to die of ARDS.
If you have ARDS, you can develop other medical problems while in the hospital. The most common problems are:
Blood clots. Lying still in the hospital while you're on a ventilator can increase your risk of developing blood clots, particularly in the deep veins in your legs. If a clot forms in your leg, a portion of it can break off and travel to one or both of your lungs (pulmonary embolism) — where it blocks blood flow.
Collapsed lung (pneumothorax). In most ARDS cases, a breathing machine called a ventilator is used to increase oxygen in the body and force fluid out of the lungs. However, the pressure and air volume of the ventilator can force gas to go through a small hole in the very outside of a lung and cause that lung to collapse.
Infections. Because the ventilator is attached directly to a tube inserted in your windpipe, this makes it much easier for germs to infect and further injure your lungs.
Scarring (pulmonary fibrosis). Scarring and thickening of the tissue between the air sacs can occur within a few weeks of the onset of ARDS. This stiffens your lungs, making it even more difficult for oxygen to flow from the air sacs into your bloodstream.
Thanks to improved treatments, more people are surviving ARDS. However, many survivors end up with potentially serious and sometimes lasting effects:
Breathing problems. Many people with ARDS recover most of their lung function within several months to two years, but others may have breathing problems for the rest of their lives. Even people who do well usually have shortness of breath and fatigue and may need supplemental oxygen at home for a few months.
Depression. Most ARDS survivors also report going through a period of depression, which is treatable.
Problems with memory and thinking clearly. Sedatives and low levels of oxygen in the blood can lead to memory loss and cognitive problems after ARDS. In some cases, the effects may lessen over time, but in others, the damage may be permanent.
Tiredness and muscle weakness. Being in the hospital and on a ventilator can cause your muscles to weaken. You also may feel very tired following treatment.
Atherosclerosis develops gradually. Mild atherosclerosis usually doesn't have any symptoms.
You usually won't have atherosclerosis symptoms until an artery is so narrowed or clogged that it can't supply adequate blood to your organs and tissues. Sometimes a blood clot completely blocks blood flow, or even breaks apart and can trigger a heart attack or stroke.
Symptoms of moderate to severe atherosclerosis depend on which arteries are affected. For example:
If you have atherosclerosis in your heart arteries, you may have symptoms, such as chest pain or pressure (angina).
If you have atherosclerosis in the arteries leading to your brain, you may have signs and symptoms such as sudden numbness or weakness in your arms or legs, difficulty speaking or slurred speech, temporary loss of vision in one eye, or drooping muscles in your face. These signal a transient ischemic attack (TIA), which, if left untreated, may progress to a stroke.
If you have atherosclerosis in the arteries in your arms and legs, you may have symptoms of peripheral artery disease, such as leg pain when walking (claudication).
If you have atherosclerosis in the arteries leading to your kidneys, you develop high blood pressure or kidney failure.
If you think you have atherosclerosis, talk to your doctor. Also pay attention to early symptoms of inadequate blood flow, such as chest pain (angina), leg pain or numbness.
Early diagnosis and treatment can stop atherosclerosis from worsening and prevent a heart attack, stroke or another medical emergency.
Atherosclerosis is a slow, progressive disease that may begin as early as childhood. Although the exact cause is unknown, atherosclerosis may start with damage or injury to the inner layer of an artery. The damage may be caused by: High blood pressure, High cholesterol, High triglycerides, a type of fat (lipid) in your blood, Smoking and other sources of tobacco, Insulin resistance, obesity or diabetes, Inflammation from diseases, such as arthritis, lupus or infections, or inflammation of unknown cause.
Once the inner wall of an artery is damaged, blood cells and other substances often clump at the injury site and build up in the inner lining of the artery.
Over time, fatty deposits (plaque) made of cholesterol and other cellular products also build up at the injury site and harden, narrowing your arteries. The organs and tissues connected to the blocked arteries then don't receive enough blood to function properly.
Eventually, pieces of the fatty deposits may break off and enter your bloodstream.
In addition, the smooth lining of the plaque may rupture, spilling cholesterol and other substances into your bloodstream. This may cause a blood clot, which can block the blood flow to a specific part of your body, such as occurs when blocked blood flow to your heart causes a heart attack. A blood clot can also travel to other parts of your body, blocking flow to another organ.
Hardening of the arteries occurs over time. Besides aging, factors that increase the risk of atherosclerosis include: High blood pressure, High cholesterol, Diabetes, Obesity, Smoking and other tobacco use, A family history of early heart disease, Lack of exercise, An unhealthy diet.
The complications of atherosclerosis depend on which arteries are blocked. For example:
Coronary artery disease. When atherosclerosis narrows the arteries close to your heart, you may develop coronary artery disease, which can cause chest pain (angina), a heart attack or heart failure.
Carotid artery disease. When atherosclerosis narrows the arteries close to your brain, you may develop carotid artery disease, which can cause a transient ischemic attack (TIA) or stroke.
Peripheral artery disease. When atherosclerosis narrows the arteries in your arms or legs, you may develop circulation problems in your arms and legs called peripheral artery disease. This can make you less sensitive to heat and cold, increasing your risk of burns or frostbite. In rare cases, poor circulation in your arms or legs can cause tissue death (gangrene).
Aneurysms. Atherosclerosis can also cause aneurysms, a serious complication that can occur anywhere in your body. An aneurysm is a bulge in the wall of your artery.
Most people with aneurysms have no symptoms. Pain and throbbing in the area of an aneurysm may occur and is a medical emergency.
If an aneurysm bursts, you may face life-threatening internal bleeding. Although this is usually a sudden, catastrophic event, a slow leak is possible. If a blood clot within an aneurysm dislodges, it may block an artery at some distant point.
Chronic kidney disease. Atherosclerosis can cause the arteries leading to your kidneys to narrow, preventing oxygenated blood from reaching them. Over time, this can affect your kidney function, keeping waste from exiting your body.
Small arteriovenous fistulas in your legs, arms, lungs, kidneys or brain often won't have any signs or symptoms and usually don't need treatment other than monitoring by your doctor. Large arteriovenous fistulas may cause signs and symptoms.
Arteriovenous fistula signs and symptoms may include: Purplish, bulging veins that you can see through your skin, similar to varicose veins, Swelling in the arms or legs, Decreased blood pressure, Fatigue, Heart failure.
A significant arteriovenous fistula in your lungs (pulmonary arteriovenous fistula) is a serious condition and can cause: A bluish tinge to the skin, Clubbing of fingers (the fingertips spread out and become rounder than normal), Coughing up blood.
An arteriovenous fistula in your gastrointestinal tract can cause bleeding in your digestive tract.
If you have any of these signs and symptoms and think you might have an arteriovenous fistula, make an appointment to see your doctor. Early detection of an arteriovenous fistula may make your condition easier to treat. It also may reduce your risk of developing complications, including blood clots or heart failure.
Causes of arteriovenous fistulas include:
Injuries that pierce the skin. An arteriovenous fistula may occur if you have a piercing injury, such as a gunshot or stab wound, on a part of your body where a vein and artery are side by side.
Being born with an arteriovenous fistula (congenital). The exact reason why isn't clear, but in some babies, the arteries and veins don't develop properly in the womb.
Genetic conditions. Arteriovenous fistulas in the lungs (pulmonary arteriovenous fistulas) can be caused by a genetic disease (Osler-Weber-Rendu disease, also known as hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia) that causes blood vessels to develop abnormally throughout your body, but especially in the lungs.
Dialysis-related surgery. People who have late-stage kidney failure may have an arteriovenous fistula surgically created in the forearm to make it easier to perform dialysis.
In addition to certain genetic or congenital conditions, the following risk factors may make you more likely to develop an arteriovenous fistula: Being female, Cardiac catheterization, especially if the procedure involves blood vessels in your groin, Certain medications, including some blood thinners (anticoagulants) and medications used to control bleeding (anti-fibrinolytics), High blood pressure, High body mass index (BMI), Older age.
Left untreated, an arteriovenous fistula can cause complications, some of which can be serious. These include:
Heart failure. This is the most serious complication of large arteriovenous fistulas. Blood flows more quickly through an arteriovenous fistula than it does through normal blood vessels. As a result, your heart pumps harder to make up for the increase in blood flow. Over time, the increased workload on your heart can interfere with how the heart works, leading to heart failure.
Blood clots. An arteriovenous fistula in your legs can cause blood clots to form, potentially leading to deep vein thrombosis, a painful and potentially life-threatening condition if the clot travels to your lungs (pulmonary embolism). Depending on where your fistula is, it can lead to a stroke.
Leg pain. An arteriovenous fistula in your leg can cause pain in your leg (claudication), or can worsen pain you already have.
Bleeding. Arteriovenous fistulas may lead to bleeding in your gastrointestinal system.
Symptoms of AVM vary based on where it's located. Often the first signs and symptoms appear after bleeding occurs, and can include: Bleeding, Progressive loss of neurological function, Headaches, Nausea and vomiting, Seizures, Loss of consciousness.
Other possible signs and symptoms include: Weak muscles, Paralysis in one part of the body, Loss of coordination (ataxia) that can cause problems with gait, Problems performing tasks that require planning (apraxia), Weakness in the lower extremities, Back pain, Dizziness, Vision problems, including losing part of your field of vision, loss of control of eye movements, or swelling of part of the optic nerve, Problems with speech or understanding language (aphasia), Unusual sensations including numbness, tingling or sudden pain, Memory loss or dementia, Hallucinations, Confusion.
Children and teens may have trouble with learning or behavior.
One type of AVM called a vein of Galen defect causes symptoms that appear at or shortly after birth. A vein of Galen defect is located deep inside the brain. Signs can include: A buildup of fluid in the brain (hydrocephalus) that causes enlargement of the head, Swollen veins on the scalp, Seizures, Failure to thrive, Congestive heart failure.
Seek medical attention if you have any of the signs and symptoms of an AVM, such as headaches, dizziness, vision problems, and changes in cognition or neurological function. Many AVMs are currently discovered by "accident," often after a CT scan or an MRI is obtained for reasons not directly related to the AVM.
AVMs are caused by development of abnormal direct connections between arteries and veins, but experts don't understand why this happens. Certain genetic changes may play a role, but most types are not usually inherited.
Rarely, having a family history of AVMs may increase your risk. But most types of AVMs are not inherited.
Certain hereditary conditions may increase your risk of AVM. These include hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), also called Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome.
The most common signs and symptoms of arthritis involve the joints. Depending on the type of arthritis you have, your signs and symptoms may include: Pain, Stiffness, Swelling, Redness, Decreased range of motion.
The two main types of arthritis — osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis — damage joints in different ways.
The most common type of arthritis, osteoarthritis involves wear-and-tear damage to your joint's cartilage — the hard, slick coating on the ends of bones where they form a joint. Cartilage cushions the ends of the bones and allows nearly frictionless joint motion, but enough damage can result in bone grinding directly on bone, which causes pain and restricted movement. This wear and tear can occur over many years, or it can be hastened by a joint injury or infection.
Osteoarthritis also affects the entire joint. It causes changes in the bones and deterioration of the connective tissues that attach muscle to bone and hold the joint together. It also causes inflammation of the joint lining.
In rheumatoid arthritis, the body's immune system attacks the lining of the joint capsule, a tough membrane that encloses all the joint parts. This lining (synovial membrane) becomes inflamed and swollen. The disease process can eventually destroy cartilage and bone within the joint.
Risk factors for arthritis include:
Family history. Some types of arthritis run in families, so you may be more likely to develop arthritis if your parents or siblings have the disorder. Your genes can make you more susceptible to environmental factors that may trigger arthritis.
Age. The risk of many types of arthritis — including osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis and gout — increases with age.
Your sex. Women are more likely than men to develop rheumatoid arthritis, while most of the people who have gout, another type of arthritis, are men.
Previous joint injury. People who have injured a joint, perhaps while playing a sport, are more likely to eventually develop arthritis in that joint.
Obesity. Carrying excess pounds puts stress on joints, particularly your knees, hips and spine. People with obesity have a higher risk of developing arthritis.
Severe arthritis, particularly if it affects your hands or arms, can make it difficult for you to do daily tasks. Arthritis of weight-bearing joints can keep you from walking comfortably or sitting up straight. In some cases, joints may become twisted and deformed.
The effects of long-term exposure to asbestos typically don't show up until 10 to 40 years after initial exposure. Symptoms can vary in severity. Asbestosis signs and symptoms may include: Shortness of breath, A persistent, dry cough, Loss of appetite with weight loss, Fingertips and toes that appear wider and rounder than normal (clubbing), Chest tightness or pain.
If you have a history of exposure to asbestos and you're experiencing increasing shortness of breath, talk to your doctor about the possibility of asbestosis.
If you are exposed to high levels of asbestos dust over a long period of time, some of the airborne fibers can become lodged within your alveoli — the tiny sacs inside your lungs where oxygen is exchanged for carbon dioxide in your blood. The asbestos fibers irritate and scar lung tissue, causing the lungs to become stiff. This makes it difficult to breathe.
As asbestosis progresses, more and more lung tissue becomes scarred. Eventually, your lung tissue becomes so stiff that it can't contract and expand normally.
Smoking appears to increase the retention of asbestos fibers in the lungs, and often results in a faster progression of the disease.
People who worked in mining, milling, manufacturing, installation or removal of asbestos products before the late 1970s are at risk of asbestosis. Examples include: Asbestos miners, Aircraft and auto mechanics, Boiler operators, Building construction workers, Electricians, Railroad workers, Refinery and mill workers, Shipyard workers, Workers removing asbestos insulation around steam pipes in older buildings.
Risk of asbestosis is generally related to the amount and the duration of exposure to asbestos. The greater the exposure is, the greater the risk is of lung damage.
Secondhand exposure is possible for household members of exposed workers, as asbestos fibers may be carried home on clothing. People living close to mines may also be exposed to asbestos fibers released into the air.
In general, it's safe to be around materials that are made with asbestos as long as the asbestos fibers are contained. This prevents them from getting into the air and being inhaled.
If you have asbestosis, you're at increased risk of developing lung cancer — especially if you smoke or have a history of smoking. Rarely, malignant mesothelioma, a cancer of the tissue around the lung, can occur many years after exposure to asbestos.
Most people infected with ascariasis have no signs or symptoms. Moderate to heavy infestations cause various signs or symptoms, depending on which part of your body is affected.
After you swallow the tiny (microscopic) ascariasis eggs, they hatch in the small intestine and the larvae migrate through the bloodstream or lymphatic system into the lungs. At this stage, you may experience signs and symptoms similar to asthma or pneumonia, including: Persistent cough, Shortness of breath, Wheezing.
After spending 10 to 14 days in the lungs, the larvae travel to the throat, where you cough them up and then swallow them.
The larvae mature into adult worms in the small intestine, and the adult worms typically live in the intestines until they die. In mild or moderate ascariasis, the intestinal infestation can cause: Vague abdominal pain, Nausea and vomiting, Diarrhea or bloody stools.
If you have a large number of worms in the intestine, you might have: Severe abdominal pain, Fatigue, Vomiting, Weight loss or malnutrition, A worm in your vomit or stool.
Talk to your doctor if you have persistent abdominal pain, diarrhea or nausea.
Ascariasis isn't spread directly from person to person. Instead, a person has to come into contact with soil mixed with human or pig feces that contain ascariasis eggs or infected water. In some developing countries, human feces are used for fertilizer, or poor sanitary facilities allow human waste to mix with soil in yards, ditches and fields. People can also get it from eating uncooked pig or chicken liver that is infected.
Small children often play in dirt, and infection can occur if they put their dirty fingers in their mouths. Unwashed fruits or vegetables grown in contaminated soil also can transmit the ascariasis eggs.
Ingestion. The tiny (microscopic) ascariasis eggs can't become infective without coming into contact with soil. People can accidentally ingest (swallow) contaminated soil through hand-to-mouth contact or by eating uncooked fruits or vegetables that have been grown in contaminated soil.
Migration. Larvae hatch from the eggs in your small intestine and then go through the intestinal wall to travel to the heart and lungs via the bloodstream or lymphatic system. After maturing for about 10 to 14 days in your lungs, the larvae break into your airway and travel up the throat, where they're coughed up and swallowed.
Maturation. Once they're back in the intestines, the parasites grow into male or female worms. Female worms can be more than 15 inches (40 centimeters) long and a little less than a quarter inch (6 millimeters) in diameter. Male worms are generally smaller.
Reproduction. Female worms can produce 200,000 eggs a day if there are both female and male worms in the intestines, and the eggs leave your body in feces. The fertilized eggs must be in soil for at least two to four weeks before they become infective.
The whole process — from egg ingestion to egg deposits — takes about two or three months. Ascariasis worms can live inside your body for a year or two.
Risk factors for ascariasis include:
Age. Most people who have ascariasis are 10 years old or younger. Children in this age group may be at higher risk because they're more likely to play in dirt.
Warm climate. In the United States, ascariasis is more common in the Southeast. But it's more frequent in developing countries with warm temperatures year-round.
Poor sanitation. Ascariasis is widespread in developing countries where human feces are allowed to mix with local soil.
Mild cases of ascariasis usually don't cause complications. If you have a heavy infestation, potentially dangerous complications may include:
Slowed growth. Loss of appetite and poor absorption of digested foods put children with ascariasis at risk of not getting enough nutrition, which can slow growth.
Intestinal blockage and perforation. In heavy ascariasis infestation, a mass of worms can block a portion of your intestine. This can cause severe abdominal cramping and vomiting. The blockage can even make a hole in the intestinal wall or appendix, causing internal bleeding (hemorrhage) or appendicitis.
Duct blockages. In some cases, worms may block the narrow ducts of your liver or pancreas, causing severe pain.
The signs and symptoms of aspergillosis vary with the type of illness you develop:
Some people with asthma or cystic fibrosis have an allergic reaction to aspergillus mold. Signs and symptoms of this condition, known as allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, include: Fever, A cough that may bring up blood or plugs of mucus, Worsening asthma.
Certain chronic lung (pulmonary) conditions, such as emphysema, tuberculosis or advanced sarcoidosis, can cause air spaces (cavities) to form in the lungs. When people with lung cavities are also infected with aspergillus, fungus fibers may find their way into the cavities and grow into tangled masses (fungus balls) known as aspergillomas.
Aspergillomas may produce no symptoms or cause only a mild cough at first. Over time and without treatment, however, aspergillomas can worsen the underlying chronic lung condition and possibly cause: A cough that often brings up blood (hemoptysis), Wheezing, Shortness of breath, Unintentional weight loss, Fatigue.
This is the most severe form of aspergillosis. It occurs when the infection spreads rapidly from the lungs to the brain, heart, kidneys or skin. Invasive aspergillosis occurs only in people whose immune systems are weakened as a result of cancer chemotherapy, bone marrow transplantation or a disease of the immune system. Untreated, this form of aspergillosis may be fatal.
Signs and symptoms depend on which organs are affected, but in general, invasive aspergillosis can cause: Fever and chills, A cough that brings up blood (hemoptysis), Shortness of breath, Chest or joint pain, Headaches or eye symptoms, Skin lesions.
Aspergillus can invade areas of your body other than your lungs, such as your sinuses. In your sinuses, the fungus can cause a stuffy nose sometimes accompanied by drainage that may contain blood. Fever, facial pain and headache may also occur.
If you have asthma or cystic fibrosis, see your doctor whenever you notice a change in your breathing. Although aspergillosis may not be the cause, it's important to have breathing problems evaluated.
If you have a weakened immune system and develop an unexplained fever, shortness of breath or a cough that brings up blood, get immediate medical care. In the case of invasive aspergillosis, prompt treatment is crucial. In some cases, treatment with antifungal medication begins as soon as aspergillosis is suspected, even before testing has confirmed the diagnosis.
Aspergillus mold is unavoidable. Outdoors, it's found in decaying leaves and compost and on plants, trees and grain crops.
Everyday exposure to aspergillus is rarely a problem for people with healthy immune systems. When mold spores are inhaled, immune system cells surround and destroy them. But people who have a weakened immune system from illness or immunosuppressant medications have fewer infection-fighting cells. This allows aspergillus to take hold, invading the lungs and, in the most serious cases, other parts of the body.
Aspergillosis is not contagious from person to person.
Your risk of developing aspergillosis depends on your overall health and the extent of your exposure to mold. In general, these factors make you more vulnerable to infection:
Weakened immune system. People taking immune-suppressing drugs after undergoing transplant surgery — especially bone marrow or stem cell transplants — or people who have certain cancers of the blood are at highest risk of invasive aspergillosis. People in the later stages of AIDS also may be at increased risk.
Low white blood cell level. People who have had chemotherapy, an organ transplant or leukemia have lower white cell levels, making them more susceptible to invasive aspergillosis. So does having chronic granulomatous disease — an inherited disorder that affects immune system cells.
Lung cavities. People who have air spaces (cavities) in their lungs are at higher risk of developing aspergillomas.
Asthma or cystic fibrosis. People with asthma and cystic fibrosis, especially those whose lung problems are long-standing or hard to control, are more likely to have an allergic response to aspergillus mold.
Long-term corticosteroid therapy. Long-term use of corticosteroids may increase the risk of opportunistic infections, depending on the underlying disease being treated and what other drugs are being used.
Depending on the type of infection, aspergillosis can cause a variety of serious complications:
Bleeding. Both aspergillomas and invasive aspergillosis can cause severe, and sometimes fatal, bleeding in your lungs.
Systemic infection. The most serious complication of invasive aspergillosis is the spread of the infection to other parts of your body, especially your brain, heart and kidneys. Invasive aspergillosis spreads rapidly and may be fatal.
Asthma attack signs and symptoms include: Severe shortness of breath, chest tightness or pain, and coughing or wheezing, Low peak expiratory flow (PEF) readings, if you use a peak flow meter, Symptoms that fail to respond to use of a quick-acting (rescue) inhaler.
Signs and symptoms of an asthma attack vary from person to person. Work with your doctor to identify your particular signs and symptoms of worsening asthma — and what to do when they occur.
If your asthma symptoms don't improve or get worse after you take medication as your doctor directed, you may need emergency treatment. Your doctor can help you learn to recognize an asthma emergency so that you'll know when to get help.
If your asthma flares up, immediately follow the treatment steps you and your doctor worked out in your written asthma plan. If your symptoms and peak expiratory flow (PEF) readings improve, home treatment may be all that's needed. If your symptoms don't improve with home treatment, you may need to seek emergency care.
When your asthma symptoms flare up, follow your written asthma plan's instructions for using your quick-acting (rescue) inhaler. PEF readings ranging from 51% to 79% of your personal best are a sign you need to use the quick-acting (rescue) medications prescribed by your doctor.
Asthma can change over time, so you'll need periodic adjustments to your treatment plan to keep daily symptoms under control. If your asthma isn't well controlled, you're more likely to have an asthma attack. Lingering lung inflammation means your asthma could flare up at any time.
Go to all scheduled doctor's appointments. If you have regular asthma flare-ups, or if you have low peak flow readings or other signs your asthma isn't well controlled, make an appointment to see your doctor.
Seek medical attention right away if you have signs or symptoms of a serious asthma attack, which include: Severe breathlessness or wheezing, especially at night or in the early morning, The inability to speak more than short phrases due to shortness of breath, Having to strain your chest muscles to breathe, Low peak flow readings when you use a peak flow meter, No improvement after using a quick-acting (rescue) inhaler.
An overly sensitive immune system makes your airways (bronchial tubes) become inflamed and swollen when you're exposed to certain triggers. Asthma triggers vary from person to person. Common asthma attack triggers include: Pollen, pets, mold and dust mites, Upper respiratory infections, Tobacco smoke, Inhaling cold, dry air, Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), Stress.
For many people, asthma symptoms get worse with respiratory infections, such as those caused by the common cold. Some people have asthma flare-ups caused by something in their work environment. Sometimes, there isn't an apparent cause for an asthma attack.
Anyone who has asthma is at risk of an asthma attack. You may be at increased risk of a serious asthma attack if: You've had a severe asthma attack in the past, You've previously been admitted to the hospital or had to go to the emergency room for asthma, You've previously required intubation for an asthma attack, You use more than two quick-acting (rescue) inhalers a month, Your asthma attacks tend to sneak up on you before you notice symptoms have worsened, You have other chronic health conditions, such as sinusitis or nasal polyps, or cardiovascular or chronic lung disease.
Asthma attacks can be serious. They can:
Interrupt everyday activities such as sleep, school, work and exercise, causing a significant impact on your quality of life — and can disrupt the lives of those around you.
Send you to the emergency room, which can be stressful and costly.
Lead to respiratory arrest and death.
Asthma symptoms vary from person to person. You may have infrequent asthma attacks, have symptoms only at certain times — such as when exercising — or have symptoms all the time.
Asthma signs and symptoms include: Shortness of breath, Chest tightness or pain, Wheezing when exhaling, which is a common sign of asthma in children, Trouble sleeping caused by shortness of breath, coughing or wheezing, Coughing or wheezing attacks that are worsened by a respiratory virus, such as a cold or the flu.
Signs that your asthma is probably worsening include: Asthma signs and symptoms that are more frequent and bothersome, Increasing difficulty breathing, as measured with a device used to check how well your lungs are working (peak flow meter), The need to use a quick-relief inhaler more often.
For some people, asthma signs and symptoms flare up in certain situations: Exercise-induced asthma, which may be worse when the air is cold and dry, Occupational asthma, triggered by workplace irritants such as chemical fumes, gases or dust, Allergy-induced asthma, triggered by airborne substances, such as pollen, mold spores, cockroach waste, or particles of skin and dried saliva shed by pets (pet dander).
Severe asthma attacks can be life-threatening. Work with your doctor to determine what to do when your signs and symptoms worsen — and when you need emergency treatment. Signs of an asthma emergency include: Rapid worsening of shortness of breath or wheezing, No improvement even after using a quick-relief inhaler, Shortness of breath when you are doing minimal physical activity.
See your doctor:
If you think you have asthma. If you have frequent coughing or wheezing that lasts more than a few days or any other signs or symptoms of asthma, see your doctor. Treating asthma early may prevent long-term lung damage and help keep the condition from getting worse over time.
To monitor your asthma after diagnosis. If you know you have asthma, work with your doctor to keep it under control. Good long-term control helps you feel better from day to day and can prevent a life-threatening asthma attack.
If your asthma symptoms get worse. Contact your doctor right away if your medication doesn't seem to ease your symptoms or if you need to use your quick-relief inhaler more often.
Don't take more medication than prescribed without consulting your doctor first. Overusing asthma medication can cause side effects and may make your asthma worse.
To review your treatment. Asthma often changes over time. Meet with your doctor regularly to discuss your symptoms and make any needed treatment adjustments.
It isn't clear why some people get asthma and others don't, but it's probably due to a combination of environmental and inherited (genetic) factors.
Exposure to various irritants and substances that trigger allergies (allergens) can trigger signs and symptoms of asthma. Asthma triggers are different from person to person and can include: Airborne allergens, such as pollen, dust mites, mold spores, pet dander or particles of cockroach waste, Respiratory infections, such as the common cold, Physical activity, Cold air, Air pollutants and irritants, such as smoke, Certain medications, including beta blockers, aspirin, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve), Strong emotions and stress, Sulfites and preservatives added to some types of foods and beverages, including shrimp, dried fruit, processed potatoes, beer and wine, Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), a condition in which stomach acids back up into your throat.
A number of factors are thought to increase your chances of developing asthma. They include: Having a blood relative with asthma, such as a parent or sibling, Having another allergic condition, such as atopic dermatitis — which causes red, itchy skin — or hay fever — which causes a runny nose, congestion and itchy eyes, Being overweight, Being a smoker, Exposure to secondhand smoke, Exposure to exhaust fumes or other types of pollution, Exposure to occupational triggers, such as chemicals used in farming, hairdressing and manufacturing.
Asthma complications include: Signs and symptoms that interfere with sleep, work and other activities, Sick days from work or school during asthma flare-ups, A permanent narrowing of the tubes that carry air to and from your lungs (bronchial tubes), which affects how well you can breathe, Emergency room visits and hospitalizations for severe asthma attacks, Side effects from long-term use of some medications used to stabilize severe asthma.
Proper treatment makes a big difference in preventing both short-term and long-term complications caused by asthma.
Signs and symptoms of astigmatism may include: Blurred or distorted vision, Eyestrain or discomfort, Headaches, Difficulty with night vision, Squinting.
See an eye doctor if your eye symptoms detract from your enjoyment of activities or interfere with your ability to perform everyday tasks. An eye doctor can determine whether you have astigmatism and, if so, to what degree. He or she can then advise you of your options to correct your vision.
Children may not realize their vision is blurry, so they need to be screened for eye disease and have their vision tested by a pediatrician, an ophthalmologist, an optometrist or another trained screener at the following ages and intervals. During the newborn period, At well-child visits until school age, During school years, every one to two years at well-child visits, at the eye doctor, or through school or public screenings.
Your eye has two structures with curved surfaces that bend (refract) light onto the retina, which makes the images: The cornea, the clear front surface of your eye along with the tear film, The lens, a clear structure inside your eye that changes shape to help focus on near objects.
In a perfectly shaped eye, each of these elements has a round curvature, like the surface of a smooth ball. A cornea and lens with such curvature bend (refract) all incoming light equally to make a sharply focused image directly on the retina, at the back of your eye.
If either your cornea or lens is egg shaped with two mismatched curves, light rays aren't bent the same, which forms two different images. These two images overlap or combine and result in blurred vision. Astigmatism is a type of refractive error.
Astigmatism occurs when your cornea or lens is curved more steeply in one direction than in another. You have corneal astigmatism if your cornea has mismatched curves. You have lenticular astigmatism if your lens has mismatched curves.
Either type of astigmatism can cause blurred vision. Blurred vision may occur more in one direction, either horizontally, vertically or diagonally.
Astigmatism may be present from birth, or it may develop after an eye injury, disease or surgery. Astigmatism isn't caused or made worse by reading in poor light, sitting too close to the television or squinting.
Astigmatism may occur in combination with other refractive errors, which include:
Nearsightedness (myopia). This occurs when your cornea is curved too much or your eye is longer than normal. Instead of being focused precisely on your retina, light is focused in front of your retina, making distant objects seem blurry.
Farsightedness (hyperopia). This occurs when your cornea is curved too little or your eye is shorter than normal. The effect is the opposite of nearsightedness. When your eye is in a relaxed state, light never comes to a focus on the back of your eye, making nearby objects seem blurry.
Ataxia can develop over time or come on suddenly. A sign of a number of neurological disorders, ataxia can cause: Poor coordination, Unsteady walk and a tendency to stumble, Difficulty with fine motor tasks, such as eating, writing or buttoning a shirt, Change in speech, Involuntary back-and-forth eye movements (nystagmus), Difficulty swallowing.
If you aren't aware of having a condition that causes ataxia, such as multiple sclerosis, see your doctor as soon as possible if you: Lose balance, Lose muscle coordination in a hand, arm or leg, Have difficulty walking, Slur your speech, Have difficulty swallowing.
Damage, degeneration or loss of nerve cells in the part of your brain that controls muscle coordination (cerebellum), results in ataxia. Your cerebellum comprises two portions of folded tissue situated at the base of your brain near your brainstem. This area of the brain helps with balance as well as eye movements, swallowing and speech.
Diseases that damage the spinal cord and peripheral nerves that connect your cerebellum to your muscles also can cause ataxia. Ataxia causes include:
Head trauma. Damage to your brain or spinal cord from a blow to your head, such as might occur in a car accident, can cause acute cerebellar ataxia, which comes on suddenly.
Stroke. Either a blockage or bleeding in the brain can cause ataxia. When the blood supply to a part of your brain is interrupted or severely reduced, depriving brain tissue of oxygen and nutrients, brain cells die.
Cerebral palsy. This is a general term for a group of disorders caused by damage to a child's brain during early development — before, during or shortly after birth — that affects the child's ability to coordinate body movements.
Autoimmune diseases. Multiple sclerosis, sarcoidosis, celiac disease and other autoimmune conditions can cause ataxia.
Infections. Ataxia can be an uncommon complication of chickenpox and other viral infections such as HIV and Lyme disease. It might appear in the healing stages of the infection and last for days or weeks. Normally, the ataxia resolves over time.
Paraneoplastic syndromes. These are rare, degenerative disorders triggered by your immune system's response to a cancerous tumor (neoplasm), most commonly from lung, ovarian, breast or lymphatic cancer. Ataxia can appear months or years before the cancer is diagnosed.
Abnormalities in the brain. An infected area (abscess) in the brain may cause ataxia. A growth on the brain, cancerous (malignant) or noncancerous (benign), can damage the cerebellum.
Toxic reaction. Ataxia is a potential side effect of certain medications, especially barbiturates, such as phenobarbital; sedatives, such as benzodiazepines; antiepileptic drugs, such as phenytoin; and some types of chemotherapy. Vitamin B-6 toxicity also may cause ataxia. These causes are important to identify because the effects are often reversible.
Also, some medications you take can cause problems as you age, so you might need to reduce your dose or discontinue the medication.
Alcohol and drug intoxication; heavy metal poisoning, such as from lead or mercury; and solvent poisoning, such as from paint thinner, also can cause ataxia.
Vitamin E, vitamin B-12 or thiamine deficiency. Not getting enough of these nutrients, because of the inability to absorb enough, alcohol misuse or other reasons, can lead to ataxia.
Thyroid problems. Hypothyroidism and hypoparathyroidism can cause ataxia.
COVID-19 infection. This infection may cause ataxia, most commonly in very severe cases.
For some adults who develop sporadic ataxia, no specific cause can be found. Sporadic ataxia can take a number of forms, including multiple system atrophy, a progressive, degenerative disorder.
Some types of ataxia and some conditions that cause ataxia are hereditary. If you have one of these conditions, you were born with a defect in a certain gene that makes abnormal proteins.
The abnormal proteins hamper the function of nerve cells, primarily in your cerebellum and spinal cord, and cause them to degenerate. As the disease progresses, coordination problems worsen.
You can inherit a genetic ataxia from either a dominant gene from one parent (autosomal dominant disorder) or a recessive gene from each parent (autosomal recessive disorder). In the latter case, it's possible neither parent has the disorder (silent mutation), so there might be no obvious family history.
Different gene defects cause different types of ataxia, most of which are progressive. Each type causes poor coordination, but each has specific signs and symptoms.
These include:
Spinocerebellar ataxias. Researchers have identified more than 40 autosomal dominant ataxia genes, and the number continues to grow. Cerebellar ataxia and cerebellar degeneration are common to all types, but other signs and symptoms, as well as age of onset, differ depending on the specific gene mutation.
Episodic ataxia (EA). There are eight recognized types of ataxia that are episodic rather than progressive — EA1 through EA7, plus late-onset episodic ataxia. EA1 and EA2 are the most common. EA1 involves brief ataxic episodes that may last seconds or minutes. The episodes are triggered by stress, being startled or sudden movement, and often are associated with muscle twitching.
EA2 involves longer episodes, usually lasting from 30 minutes to six hours, which also are triggered by stress. You might have dizziness (vertigo), fatigue and muscle weakness during your episodes. In some cases, symptoms resolve in later life.
Episodic ataxia doesn't shorten life span, and symptoms might respond to medication.
These include:
Friedreich's ataxia. This common hereditary ataxia involves damage to your cerebellum, spinal cord and peripheral nerves. Peripheral nerves carry signals from your brain and spinal cord to your muscles. In most cases, signs and symptoms appear well before age 25.
The rate of disease progression varies. The first indication generally is difficulty walking (gait ataxia). The condition typically progresses to the arms and trunk. Muscles weaken and waste away over time, causing deformities, particularly in your feet, lower legs and hands.
Other signs and symptoms that might develop as the disease progresses include slow, slurred speech (dysarthria); fatigue; rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus); spinal curvature (scoliosis); hearing loss; and heart disease, including heart enlargement (cardiomyopathy) and heart failure. Early treatment of heart problems can improve quality of life and survival.
Ataxia-telangiectasia. This rare, progressive childhood disease causes degeneration in the brain and other body systems. The disease also causes immune system breakdown (immunodeficiency disease), which increases susceptibility to other diseases, including infections and tumors. It affects various organs.
Telangiectasia is the formation of tiny red "spider" veins that might appear in the corners of your child's eyes or on the ears and cheeks. Delayed motor skill development, poor balance and slurred speech are typically the first indications of the disease. Recurrent sinus and respiratory infections are common.
Children with ataxia-telangiectasia are at high risk of developing cancer, particularly leukemia or lymphoma. Most people with the disease need a wheelchair by their teens and die before age 30, usually of cancer or lung (pulmonary) disease.
Congenital cerebellar ataxia. This type of ataxia results from damage to the cerebellum that's present at birth.
Wilson's disease. People with this condition accumulate copper in their brains, livers and other organs, which can cause neurological problems, including ataxia. Early identification of this disorder can lead to treatment that will slow progression.
There may be no obvious signs or symptoms of atelectasis. If you do have signs and symptoms, they may include: Difficulty breathing, Rapid, shallow breathing, Wheezing, Cough.
Always seek medical attention right away if you have trouble breathing. Other conditions besides atelectasis can cause breathing difficulties and require an accurate diagnosis and prompt treatment. If your breathing becomes increasingly difficult, seek emergency medical help.
Atelectasis occurs from a blocked airway (obstructive) or pressure from outside the lung (nonobstructive).
General anesthesia is a common cause of atelectasis. It changes your regular pattern of breathing and affects the exchange of lung gases, which can cause the air sacs (alveoli) to deflate. Nearly everyone who has major surgery develops some amount of atelectasis. It often occurs after heart bypass surgery.
Obstructive atelectasis may be caused by many things, including:
Mucus plug. A mucus plug is a buildup of mucus in your airways. It commonly occurs during and after surgery because you can't cough. Drugs given during surgery make you breathe less deeply, so normal secretions collect in the airways. Suctioning the lungs during surgery helps clear them, but sometimes they still build up. Mucus plugs are also common in children, people with cystic fibrosis and during severe asthma attacks.
Foreign body. Atelectasis is common in children who have inhaled an object, such as a peanut or small toy part, into their lungs.
Tumor inside the airway. An abnormal growth can narrow the airway.
Possible causes of nonobstructive atelectasis include:
Injury. Chest trauma — from a fall or car accident, for example — can cause you to avoid taking deep breaths (due to the pain), which can result in compression of your lungs.
Pleural effusion. This condition involves the buildup of fluid between the tissues (pleura) that line the lungs and the inside of the chest wall.
Pneumonia. Various types of pneumonia, a lung infection, can cause atelectasis.
Pneumothorax. Air leaks into the space between your lungs and chest wall, indirectly causing some or all of a lung to collapse.
Scarring of lung tissue. Scarring could be caused by injury, lung disease or surgery.
Tumor. A large tumor can press against and deflate the lung, as opposed to blocking the air passages.
Factors that make you more likely to develop atelectasis include: Older age, Any condition that makes it difficult to swallow, Confinement to bed with infrequent changes of position, Lung disease, such as asthma, COPD, bronchiectasis or cystic fibrosis, Recent abdominal or chest surgery, Recent general anesthesia, Weak breathing (respiratory) muscles due to muscular dystrophy, spinal cord injury or another neuromuscular condition, Medications that may cause shallow breathing, Pain or injury that may make it painful to cough or cause shallow breathing, including stomach pain or rib fracture, Smoking.
A small area of atelectasis, especially in an adult, usually is treatable. The following complications may result from atelectasis:
Low blood oxygen (hypoxemia). Atelectasis makes it more difficult for your lungs to get oxygen to the air sacs (alveoli).
Pneumonia. Your risk for pneumonia continues until the atelectasis goes away. Mucus in a collapsed lung may lead to infection.
Respiratory failure. Loss of a lobe or a whole lung, particularly in an infant or in someone with lung disease, can be life-threatening.
Athlete's foot usually causes a scaly red rash. The rash typically begins in between the toes. Itching is often the worst right after you take off your shoes and socks.
Some types of athlete's foot feature blisters or ulcers. The moccasin variety of athlete's foot causes chronic dryness and scaling on the soles that extends up the side of the foot. It can be mistaken for eczema or dry skin.
The infection can affect one or both feet and can spread to your hand — especially if you scratch or pick at the infected parts of your feet.
If you have a rash on your foot that doesn't improve within two weeks of beginning self-treatment with an over-the-counter antifungal product, see your doctor.
If you have diabetes, see your doctor if you suspect you have athlete's foot, especially if you notice any signs of a possible secondary bacterial infection such as excessive redness, swelling, drainage or fever.
Athlete's foot is caused by the same type of fungus that causes ringworm and jock itch. Damp socks and shoes and warm, humid conditions favor the organisms' growth.
Athlete's foot is contagious and can be spread by contact with an infected person or from contact with contaminated surfaces, such as towels, floors and shoes.
You are at higher risk of athlete's foot if you: Are a man, Frequently wear damp socks or tightfitting shoes, Share mats, rugs, bed linens, clothes or shoes with someone who has a fungal infection, Walk barefoot in public areas where the infection can spread, such as locker rooms, saunas, swimming pools, communal baths and showers.
Your athlete's foot infection can spread to other parts of your body, including:
Your hand. People who scratch or pick at the infected parts of their feet may develop a similar infection in one of their hands.
Your nails. The fungi associated with athlete's foot can also infect your toenails, a location that tends to be more resistant to treatment.
Your groin. Jock itch is often caused by the same fungus that results in athlete's foot. It's common for the infection to spread from the feet to the groin as the fungus can travel on your hands or on a towel.
Atopic dermatitis (eczema) signs and symptoms vary widely from person to person and include: Dry skin, Itching, which may be severe, especially at night, Red to brownish-gray patches, especially on the hands, feet, ankles, wrists, neck, upper chest, eyelids, inside the bend of the elbows and knees, and in infants, the face and scalp, Small, raised bumps, which may leak fluid and crust over when scratched, Thickened, cracked, scaly skin, Raw, sensitive, swollen skin from scratching.
Atopic dermatitis most often begins before age 5 and may persist into adolescence and adulthood. For some people, it flares periodically and then clears up for a time, even for several years.
See a doctor if you or your child: Is so uncomfortable that the condition is affecting sleep and daily activities, Has a skin infection — look for red streaks, pus, yellow scabs, Continues to experience symptoms despite trying home remedies.
Seek immediate medical attention for your child if the rash looks infected and he or she has a fever.
Healthy skin helps retain moisture and protects you from bacteria, irritants and allergens. Eczema is related to a gene variation that affects the skin's ability to provide this protection. This allows your skin to be affected by environmental factors, irritants and allergens.
In some children, food allergies may play a role in causing eczema.
The primary risk factor for atopic dermatitis is having a personal or family history of eczema, allergies, hay fever or asthma.
Complications of atopic dermatitis (eczema) may include:
Asthma and hay fever. Eczema sometimes precedes these conditions. More than half of young children with atopic dermatitis develop asthma and hay fever by age 13.
Chronic itchy, scaly skin. A skin condition called neurodermatitis (lichen simplex chronicus) starts with a patch of itchy skin. You scratch the area, which makes it even itchier. Eventually, you may scratch simply out of habit. This condition can cause the affected skin to become discolored, thick and leathery.
Skin infections. Repeated scratching that breaks the skin can cause open sores and cracks. These increase the risk of infection from bacteria and viruses, including the herpes simplex virus.
Irritant hand dermatitis. This especially affects people whose work requires that their hands are often wet and exposed to harsh soaps, detergents and disinfectants.
Allergic contact dermatitis. This condition is common in people with atopic dermatitis.
Sleep problems. The itch-scratch cycle can cause poor sleep quality.
Some people with atrial fibrillation have no symptoms and are unaware of their condition until it's discovered during a physical examination. Those who do have atrial fibrillation symptoms may experience signs and symptoms such as: Palpitations, which are sensations of a racing, uncomfortable, irregular heartbeat or a flip-flopping in your chest, Weakness, Reduced ability to exercise, Fatigue, Lightheadedness, Dizziness, Shortness of breath, Chest pain.
Atrial fibrillation may be:
Occasional. In this case it's called paroxysmal (par-ok-SIZ-mul) atrial fibrillation. You may have symptoms that come and go, usually lasting for a few minutes to hours. Sometimes symptoms occur for as long as a week and episodes can happen repeatedly. Your symptoms might go away on their own or you may need treatment.
Persistent. With this type of atrial fibrillation, your heart rhythm doesn't go back to normal on its own. If you have persistent atrial fibrillation, you'll need treatment such as an electrical shock or medications in order to restore your heart rhythm.
Long-standing persistent. This type of atrial fibrillation is continuous and lasts longer than 12 months.
Permanent. In this type of atrial fibrillation, the abnormal heart rhythm can't be restored. You'll have atrial fibrillation permanently, and you'll often require medications to control your heart rate and to prevent blood clots.
If you have any symptoms of atrial fibrillation, make an appointment with your doctor. Your doctor may order an electrocardiogram to determine if your symptoms are related to atrial fibrillation or another heart rhythm disorder (arrhythmia).
If you have chest pain, seek emergency medical assistance immediately. Chest pain could signal that you're having a heart attack.
Atrial fibrillation is an irregular and often rapid heart rate that occurs when the two upper chambers of your heart experience chaotic electrical signals. The result is a fast and irregular heart rhythm. The heart rate in atrial fibrillation may range from 100 to 175 beats a minute. The normal range for a heart rate is 60 to 100 beats a minute.
Your heart is made up of four chambers — two upper chambers (atria) and two lower chambers (ventricles). Within the upper right chamber of your heart (right atrium) is a group of cells called the sinus node. This is your heart's natural pacemaker. The sinus node produces the signal that normally starts each heartbeat.
Normally, the signal travels through the two upper heart chambers, and then through a connecting pathway between the upper and lower chambers called the atrioventricular (AV) node. The movement of the signal causes your heart to squeeze (contract), sending blood to your heart and body.
In atrial fibrillation, the signals in the upper chambers of your heart are chaotic. As a result, they quiver. The AV node — the electrical connection between the atria and the ventricles — is bombarded with impulses trying to get through to the ventricles.
The ventricles also beat rapidly, but not as rapidly as the atria, as not all the impulses get through.
Abnormalities or damage to the heart's structure are the most common cause of atrial fibrillation. Possible causes of atrial fibrillation include: High blood pressure, Heart attack, Coronary artery disease, Abnormal heart valves, Heart defects you're born with (congenital), An overactive thyroid gland or other metabolic imbalance, Exposure to stimulants, such as medications, caffeine, tobacco or alcohol, Sick sinus syndrome — improper functioning of the heart's natural pacemaker, Lung diseases, Previous heart surgery, Viral infections, Stress due to surgery, pneumonia or other illnesses, Sleep apnea.
However, some people who have atrial fibrillation don't have any heart defects or damage, a condition called lone atrial fibrillation. In lone atrial fibrillation, the cause is often unclear, and serious complications are rare.
Atrial flutter is similar to atrial fibrillation, but the rhythm in your atria is more organized and less chaotic than the abnormal patterns common with atrial fibrillation. Sometimes you may have atrial flutter that develops into atrial fibrillation and vice versa.
The risk factors for and the symptoms and causes of atrial flutter are similar to those of atrial fibrillation. For example, strokes are also a concern in someone with atrial flutter. As with atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter is usually not life-threatening when it's properly treated.
Certain factors may increase your risk of developing atrial fibrillation.
These include:
Age. The older you are, the greater your risk of developing atrial fibrillation.
Heart disease. Anyone with heart disease — such as heart valve problems, congenital heart disease, congestive heart failure, coronary artery disease, or a history of heart attack or heart surgery — has an increased risk of atrial fibrillation.
High blood pressure. Having high blood pressure, especially if it's not well-controlled with lifestyle changes or medications, can increase your risk of atrial fibrillation.
Other chronic conditions. People with certain chronic conditions such as thyroid problems, sleep apnea, metabolic syndrome, diabetes, chronic kidney disease or lung disease have an increased risk of atrial fibrillation.
Drinking alcohol. For some people, drinking alcohol can trigger an episode of atrial fibrillation. Binge drinking may put you at an even higher risk.
Obesity. People who are obese are at higher risk of developing atrial fibrillation.
Family history. An increased risk of atrial fibrillation is present in some families.
Sometimes atrial fibrillation can lead to the following complications:
Stroke. In atrial fibrillation, the chaotic rhythm may cause blood to pool in your heart's upper chambers (atria) and form clots. If a blood clot forms, it could dislodge from your heart and travel to your brain. There it might block blood flow, causing a stroke.
The risk of a stroke in atrial fibrillation depends on your age (you have a higher risk as you age) and on whether you have high blood pressure, diabetes, a history of heart failure or a previous stroke, and other factors. Certain medications, such as blood thinners, can greatly lower your risk of a stroke or the damage to other organs caused by blood clots.
Heart failure. Atrial fibrillation, especially if not controlled, may weaken the heart and lead to heart failure — a condition in which your heart can't circulate enough blood to meet your body's needs.
Many babies born with atrial septal defects have no signs or symptoms. Signs or symptoms can begin in adulthood.
Atrial septal defect signs and symptoms can include: Shortness of breath, especially when exercising, Fatigue, Swelling of legs, feet or abdomen, Heart palpitations or skipped beats, Stroke, Heart murmur, a whooshing sound that can be heard through a stethoscope.
Contact your doctor if you or your child has: Shortness of breath, Easy tiring, especially after activity, Swelling of legs, feet or abdomen, Heart palpitations or skipped beats.
The heart is divided into four chambers, two on the right and two on the left. To pump blood throughout the body, the heart uses its left and right sides for different tasks.
The right side of the heart moves blood to the lungs. In the lungs, blood picks up oxygen then returns it to the heart's left side. The left side of the heart then pumps the blood through the aorta and out to the rest of the body.
Doctors know that heart defects present at birth (congenital) arise from errors early in the heart's development, but there's often no clear cause. Genetics and environmental factors might play a role.
A large atrial septal defect can cause extra blood to overfill the lungs and overwork the right side of the heart. If not treated, the right side of the heart eventually enlarges and weakens. The blood pressure in your lungs can also increase, leading to pulmonary hypertension.
There are several types of atrial septal defects, including:
Secundum. This is the most common type of ASD and occurs in the middle of the wall between the atria (atrial septum).
Primum. This defect occurs in the lower part of the atrial septum and might occur with other congenital heart problems.
Sinus venosus. This rare defect usually occurs in the upper part of the atrial septum and is often associated with other congenital heart problems.
Coronary sinus. In this rare defect, part of the wall between the coronary sinus — which is part of the vein system of the heart — and the left atrium is missing.
It's not known why atrial septal defects occur, but some congenital heart defects appear to run in families and sometimes occur with other genetic problems, such as Down syndrome. If you have a heart defect, or you have a child with a heart defect, a genetic counselor can estimate the odds that future children will have one.
Some conditions that you have during pregnancy can increase your risk of having a baby with a heart defect, including:
Rubella infection. Becoming infected with rubella (German measles) during the first few months of your pregnancy can increase the risk of fetal heart defects.
Drug, tobacco or alcohol use, or exposure to certain substances. Use of certain medications, tobacco, alcohol or drugs, such as cocaine, during pregnancy can harm the developing fetus.
Diabetes or lupus. Having diabetes or lupus might increase your risk of having a baby with a heart defect.
A small atrial septal defect might never cause any problems. Small atrial septal defects often close during infancy.
Larger defects can cause serious problems, including: Right-sided heart failure, Heart rhythm abnormalities (arrhythmias), Increased risk of a stroke, Shortened life span.
Less common serious complications may include:
Pulmonary hypertension. If a large atrial septal defect goes untreated, increased blood flow to your lungs increases the blood pressure in the lung arteries (pulmonary hypertension).
Eisenmenger syndrome. Pulmonary hypertension can cause permanent lung damage. This complication, called Eisenmenger syndrome, usually develops over many years and occurs uncommonly in people with large atrial septal defects.
Treatment can prevent or help manage many of these complications.
Most women with an atrial septal defect can go through pregnancy without problems related to the defect. However, having a larger defect or having complications such as heart failure, arrhythmias or pulmonary hypertension can increase the risk of complications during pregnancy.
Doctors strongly advise women with Eisenmenger syndrome not to become pregnant because it can endanger their lives.
The risk of congenital heart disease is higher for children of parents with congenital heart disease. Anyone with a congenital heart defect, repaired or not, who is considering starting a family should talk to a doctor. The doctor might recommend repair before pregnancy.
Atrioventricular canal defect can involve only the two upper chambers of the heart (partial) or all four chambers (complete). In either type, extra blood circulates in the lungs.
Signs and symptoms usually develop in the first several weeks of life. These signs and symptoms are generally similar to those associated with heart failure and might include: Difficulty breathing or rapid breathing, Wheezing, Fatigue, Lack of appetite, Poor weight gain, Pale skin color, Bluish discoloration of the lips and skin, Excessive sweating, Irregular or rapid heartbeat, Swelling in the legs, ankles and feet (edema).
Signs and symptoms might not appear until early adulthood and might be related to complications that develop as a result of the defect. These signs and symptoms can include: Abnormal heartbeat (arrhythmia), Shortness of breath, High blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension), Heart valve problems, Heart failure.
See your doctor if you or your child develops signs or symptoms of atrioventricular canal defect.
Atrioventricular canal defect occurs before birth when a baby's heart is developing. Some factors, such as Down syndrome, might increase the risk of atrioventricular canal defect. But the cause is generally unknown.
The heart is divided into four chambers, two on the right and two on the left.
The right side of your heart moves blood into vessels that lead to the lungs. There, oxygen enriches the blood. The oxygen-rich blood flows back to your heart's left side and is pumped into a large vessel (aorta) that circulates blood to the rest of your body.
Valves control the flow of blood into and out of the chambers of your heart. These valves open to allow blood to move to the next chamber or to one of the arteries, and close to keep blood from flowing backward.
In partial atrioventricular canal defect:
There's a hole in the wall (septum) that separates the upper chambers (atria) of the heart.
Often the valve between the upper and lower left chambers (mitral valve) also has a defect that causes it to leak (mitral valve regurgitation).
In complete atrioventricular canal defect:
There's a large hole in the center of the heart where the walls between the atria and the lower chambers (ventricles) meet. Oxygen-rich and oxygen-poor blood mix through that hole.
Instead of separate valves on the right and left, there's one large valve between the upper and lower chambers.
The abnormal valve leaks blood into the ventricles.
The heart is forced to work harder and enlarges.
Factors that might increase a baby's risk of developing atrioventricular canal defect before birth include: Down syndrome, German measles (rubella) or another viral illness during a mother's early pregnancy, Alcohol consumption during pregnancy, Poorly controlled diabetes during pregnancy, Smoking during pregnancy, Certain medications taken during pregnancy — talk to your doctor before taking any drugs while you're pregnant or trying to become pregnant, Having a parent who had a congenital heart defect.
Complications of atrioventricular canal defect can include:
Enlargement of the heart. Increased blood flow through the heart forces it to work harder than normal, causing it to enlarge.
Pulmonary hypertension. When there is a hole (defect) that allows mixing of oxygenated (red) and deoxygenated (blue) blood, the amount of blood that goes to the lungs is increased. This results in pressure buildup in the lungs, causing high blood pressure in the lungs.
Respiratory tract infections. Atrioventricular canal defect can cause recurrent bouts of lung infections.
Heart failure. Untreated, atrioventricular canal defect usually results in the heart's inability to pump enough blood to meet the body's needs.
Treatment greatly improves the outlook for children with atrioventricular canal defect. However, some children who have corrective surgery may still be at risk later in life of: Leaky heart valves, Narrowing of the heart valves, Abnormal heart rhythm, Breathing difficulties associated with lung damage.
Common signs and symptoms of these complications include: Shortness of breath, Fatigue, Rapid, fluttering heartbeat.
Additional surgery might be needed to correct complications of atrioventricular canal defect.
The primary features of ADHD include inattention and hyperactive-impulsive behavior. ADHD symptoms start before age 12, and in some children, they're noticeable as early as 3 years of age. ADHD symptoms can be mild, moderate or severe, and they may continue into adulthood.
ADHD occurs more often in males than in females, and behaviors can be different in boys and girls. For example, boys may be more hyperactive and girls may tend to be quietly inattentive.
There are three subtypes of ADHD:
Predominantly inattentive. The majority of symptoms fall under inattention.
Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive. The majority of symptoms are hyperactive and impulsive.
Combined. This is a mix of inattentive symptoms and hyperactive/impulsive symptoms.
A child who shows a pattern of inattention may often: Fail to pay close attention to details or make careless mistakes in schoolwork, Have trouble staying focused in tasks or play, Appear not to listen, even when spoken to directly, Have difficulty following through on instructions and fail to finish schoolwork or chores, Have trouble organizing tasks and activities, Avoid or dislike tasks that require focused mental effort, such as homework, Lose items needed for tasks or activities, for example, toys, school assignments, pencils, Be easily distracted, Forget to do some daily activities, such as forgetting to do chores.
A child who shows a pattern of hyperactive and impulsive symptoms may often: Fidget with or tap his or her hands or feet, or squirm in the seat, Have difficulty staying seated in the classroom or in other situations, Be on the go, in constant motion, Run around or climb in situations when it's not appropriate, Have trouble playing or doing an activity quietly, Talk too much, Blurt out answers, interrupting the questioner, Have difficulty waiting for his or her turn, Interrupt or intrude on others' conversations, games or activities.
Most healthy children are inattentive, hyperactive or impulsive at one time or another. It's typical for preschoolers to have short attention spans and be unable to stick with one activity for long. Even in older children and teenagers, attention span often depends on the level of interest.
The same is true of hyperactivity. Young children are naturally energetic — they often are still full of energy long after they've worn their parents out. In addition, some children just naturally have a higher activity level than others do. Children should never be classified as having ADHD just because they're different from their friends or siblings.
Children who have problems in school but get along well at home or with friends are likely struggling with something other than ADHD. The same is true of children who are hyperactive or inattentive at home, but whose schoolwork and friendships remain unaffected.
If you're concerned that your child shows signs of ADHD, see your pediatrician or family doctor. Your doctor may refer you to a specialist, such as a developmental-behavioral pediatrician, psychologist, psychiatrist or pediatric neurologist, but it's important to have a medical evaluation first to check for other possible causes of your child's difficulties.
While the exact cause of ADHD is not clear, research efforts continue. Factors that may be involved in the development of ADHD include genetics, the environment or problems with the central nervous system at key moments in development.
Risk factors for ADHD may include: Blood relatives, such as a parent or sibling, with ADHD or another mental health disorder, Exposure to environmental toxins — such as lead, found mainly in paint and pipes in older buildings, Maternal drug use, alcohol use or smoking during pregnancy, Premature birth.
Although sugar is a popular suspect in causing hyperactivity, there's no reliable proof of this. Many issues in childhood can lead to difficulty sustaining attention, but that's not the same as ADHD.
ADHD can make life difficult for children. Children with ADHD: Often struggle in the classroom, which can lead to academic failure and judgment by other children and adults, Tend to have more accidents and injuries of all kinds than do children who don't have ADHD, Tend to have poor self-esteem, Are more likely to have trouble interacting with and being accepted by peers and adults, Are at increased risk of alcohol and drug abuse and other delinquent behavior.
ADHD doesn't cause other psychological or developmental problems. However, children with ADHD are more likely than others to also have conditions such as: Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), generally defined as a pattern of negative, defiant and hostile behavior toward authority figures, Conduct disorder, marked by antisocial behavior such as stealing, fighting, destroying property, and harming people or animals, Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, characterized by irritability and problems tolerating frustration, Learning disabilities, including problems with reading, writing, understanding and communicating, Substance use disorders, including drugs, alcohol and smoking, Anxiety disorders, which may cause overwhelming worry and nervousness, and include obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), Mood disorders, including depression and bipolar disorder, which includes depression as well as manic behavior, Autism spectrum disorder, a condition related to brain development that impacts how a person perceives and socializes with others, Tic disorder or Tourette syndrome, disorders that involve repetitive movements or unwanted sounds (tics) that can't be easily controlled.
Symptoms of atypical depression can vary from person to person. Key signs and symptoms may include: Depression that temporarily lifts in response to good news or positive events, Increased appetite or weight gain, Sleeping too much but still feeling sleepy in the daytime, Heavy, leaden feeling in your arms or legs that lasts an hour or more in a day, Sensitivity to rejection or criticism, which affects your relationships, social life or job.
For some people, signs and symptoms of atypical depression can be severe, such as feeling suicidal or not being able to do basic day-to-day activities.
If you feel depressed, make an appointment to see your doctor as soon as you can. Atypical depression may get worse if it isn't treated. If you're reluctant to seek treatment, talk to a friend or loved one, a health care professional, a faith leader, or someone else you trust.
If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
Also consider these options if you're having suicidal thoughts:
Call your mental health professional.
Call a suicide hotline. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) or use their webchat on suicidepreventionlifeline.org/chat.
Seek help from your primary doctor or other health care provider.
Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.
If a loved one or friend is in danger of attempting suicide or has made an attempt:
Make sure someone stays with that person.
Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
Or, if you can do so safely, take the person to the nearest hospital emergency room.
It's not known exactly what causes atypical depression or why some people have different features of depression. Atypical depression often starts in the teenage years, earlier than other types of depression, and can have a more long-term (chronic) course.
As with other types of depression, a combination of factors may be involved. These include:
Brain differences. Neurotransmitters are naturally occurring brain chemicals that carry signals to other parts of your brain and body. When these chemicals are abnormal or impaired, the function of nerve receptors and nerve systems change, leading to depression.
Inherited traits. Depression is more common in people whose blood relatives also have the condition.
Risk factors for atypical depression may include: History of bipolar disorder, Misuse of alcohol or recreational drugs, Traumatic childhood experiences, Environmental stressors.
Your risk of atypical depression may also increase if you have: Blood relatives with a history of depression, bipolar disorder or alcoholism, Stressful life events, such as the death of a loved one.
Like other types of depression, atypical depression is a serious illness that can cause major problems. Atypical depression can result in emotional, behavioral and health problems that affect every area of your life.
For example, atypical depression can be associated with: Weight gain due to an increased appetite, Personal and work relationship problems due to rejection sensitivity, Drug or alcohol use due to trouble coping, Other mental health disorders such as anxiety, Suicide from feelings of depression.
Atypical hyperplasia usually doesn't cause any specific symptoms.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you.
Atypical hyperplasia typically doesn't cause symptoms, but it may cause changes to appear on a mammogram. Atypical hyperplasia is usually discovered during a breast biopsy to investigate an abnormality found on a mammogram. Sometimes atypical hyperplasia is discovered on a biopsy done for a different condition.
It's not clear what causes atypical hyperplasia.
Atypical hyperplasia forms when breast cells become abnormal in number, size, shape, growth pattern and appearance. The appearance of the abnormal cells determines the type of atypical hyperplasia:
Atypical ductal hyperplasia causes abnormal cells that appear similar to the cells of the breast ducts.
Atypical lobular hyperplasia causes abnormal cells that appear similar to the cells of the breast lobules.
Atypical hyperplasia is thought to be part of the complex transition of cells that may evolve into breast cancer. The progression to breast cancer typically involves:
Hyperplasia. The process begins when normal cell development and growth become disrupted, causing an overproduction of normal-looking cells (hyperplasia).
Atypical hyperplasia. The excess cells stack upon one another and begin to take on an abnormal appearance. At this point, the cells have some, but not all, of the changes needed to become cancer.
Noninvasive (in situ) cancer. The abnormal cells continue to progress in appearance and multiply, evolving into in situ cancer, in which cancer cells remain confined to the area where they start growing.
Invasive cancer. Left untreated, the cancer cells may eventually become invasive cancer, invading surrounding tissue, blood vessels or lymph channels.
If you've been diagnosed with atypical hyperplasia, you have an increased risk of developing breast cancer in the future.
Women with atypical hyperplasia have a lifetime risk of breast cancer that is about four times higher than that of women who don't have atypical hyperplasia. The risk of breast cancer is the same for women with atypical ductal hyperplasia and women with atypical lobular hyperplasia.
Recent research has revealed that the risk of breast cancer increases in the years after an atypical hyperplasia diagnosis:
At 5 years after diagnosis, about 7 percent of women with atypical hyperplasia may develop breast cancer. Put another way, for every 100 women diagnosed with atypical hyperplasia, 7 can be expected to develop breast cancer five years after diagnosis. And 93 will not be diagnosed with breast cancer.
At 10 years after diagnosis, about 13 percent of women with atypical hyperplasia may develop breast cancer. That means for every 100 women diagnosed with atypical hyperplasia, 13 can be expetected to develop breast cancer 10 years after diagnosis. And 87 will not develop breast cancer.
At 25 years after diagnosis, about 30 percent of women with atypical hyperplasia may develop breast cancer. Put another way, for every 100 women diagnosed with atypical hyperplasia, 30 can be expected to develop breast cancer 25 years after diagnosis. And 70 will not develop breast cancer.
Being diagnosed with atypical hyperplasia at a younger age may increase the risk of breast cancer even more. For example, women diagnosed with atypical hyperplasia before age 45 seem to have a greater risk of developing breast cancer during their lifetimes.
Discuss your risk of breast cancer with your doctor. Understanding your risk can help you make decisions about breast cancer screening and risk-reducing medications.
Some children show signs of autism spectrum disorder in early infancy, such as reduced eye contact, lack of response to their name or indifference to caregivers. Other children may develop normally for the first few months or years of life, but then suddenly become withdrawn or aggressive or lose language skills they've already acquired. Signs usually are seen by age 2 years.
Each child with autism spectrum disorder is likely to have a unique pattern of behavior and level of severity — from low functioning to high functioning.
Some children with autism spectrum disorder have difficulty learning, and some have signs of lower than normal intelligence. Other children with the disorder have normal to high intelligence — they learn quickly, yet have trouble communicating and applying what they know in everyday life and adjusting to social situations.
Because of the unique mixture of symptoms in each child, severity can sometimes be difficult to determine. It's generally based on the level of impairments and how they impact the ability to function.
Below are some common signs shown by people who have autism spectrum disorder.
A child or adult with autism spectrum disorder may have problems with social interaction and communication skills, including any of these signs: Fails to respond to his or her name or appears not to hear you at times, Resists cuddling and holding, and seems to prefer playing alone, retreating into his or her own world, Has poor eye contact and lacks facial expression, Doesn't speak or has delayed speech, or loses previous ability to say words or sentences, Can't start a conversation or keep one going, or only starts one to make requests or label items, Speaks with an abnormal tone or rhythm and may use a singsong voice or robot-like speech, Repeats words or phrases verbatim, but doesn't understand how to use them, Doesn't appear to understand simple questions or directions, Doesn't express emotions or feelings and appears unaware of others' feelings, Doesn't point at or bring objects to share interest, Inappropriately approaches a social interaction by being passive, aggressive or disruptive, Has difficulty recognizing nonverbal cues, such as interpreting other people's facial expressions, body postures or tone of voice.
A child or adult with autism spectrum disorder may have limited, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests or activities, including any of these signs: Performs repetitive movements, such as rocking, spinning or hand flapping, Performs activities that could cause self-harm, such as biting or head-banging, Develops specific routines or rituals and becomes disturbed at the slightest change, Has problems with coordination or has odd movement patterns, such as clumsiness or walking on toes, and has odd, stiff or exaggerated body language, Is fascinated by details of an object, such as the spinning wheels of a toy car, but doesn't understand the overall purpose or function of the object, Is unusually sensitive to light, sound or touch, yet may be indifferent to pain or temperature, Doesn't engage in imitative or make-believe play, Fixates on an object or activity with abnormal intensity or focus, Has specific food preferences, such as eating only a few foods, or refusing foods with a certain texture.
As they mature, some children with autism spectrum disorder become more engaged with others and show fewer disturbances in behavior. Some, usually those with the least severe problems, eventually may lead normal or near-normal lives. Others, however, continue to have difficulty with language or social skills, and the teen years can bring worse behavioral and emotional problems.
Babies develop at their own pace, and many don't follow exact timelines found in some parenting books. But children with autism spectrum disorder usually show some signs of delayed development before age 2 years.
If you're concerned about your child's development or you suspect that your child may have autism spectrum disorder, discuss your concerns with your doctor. The symptoms associated with the disorder can also be linked with other developmental disorders.
Signs of autism spectrum disorder often appear early in development when there are obvious delays in language skills and social interactions. Your doctor may recommend developmental tests to identify if your child has delays in cognitive, language and social skills, if your child: Doesn't respond with a smile or happy expression by 6 months, Doesn't mimic sounds or facial expressions by 9 months, Doesn't babble or coo by 12 months, Doesn't gesture — such as point or wave — by 14 months, Doesn't say single words by 16 months, Doesn't play "make-believe" or pretend by 18 months, Doesn't say two-word phrases by 24 months, Loses language skills or social skills at any age.
Autism spectrum disorder has no single known cause. Given the complexity of the disorder, and the fact that symptoms and severity vary, there are probably many causes. Both genetics and environment may play a role.
Genetics. Several different genes appear to be involved in autism spectrum disorder. For some children, autism spectrum disorder can be associated with a genetic disorder, such as Rett syndrome or fragile X syndrome. For other children, genetic changes (mutations) may increase the risk of autism spectrum disorder. Still other genes may affect brain development or the way that brain cells communicate, or they may determine the severity of symptoms. Some genetic mutations seem to be inherited, while others occur spontaneously.
Environmental factors. Researchers are currently exploring whether factors such as viral infections, medications or complications during pregnancy, or air pollutants play a role in triggering autism spectrum disorder.
One of the greatest controversies in autism spectrum disorder centers on whether a link exists between the disorder and childhood vaccines. Despite extensive research, no reliable study has shown a link between autism spectrum disorder and any vaccines. In fact, the original study that ignited the debate years ago has been retracted due to poor design and questionable research methods.
Avoiding childhood vaccinations can place your child and others in danger of catching and spreading serious diseases, including whooping cough (pertussis), measles or mumps.
The number of children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder is rising. It's not clear whether this is due to better detection and reporting or a real increase in the number of cases, or both.
Autism spectrum disorder affects children of all races and nationalities, but certain factors increase a child's risk. These may include:
Your child's sex. Boys are about four times more likely to develop autism spectrum disorder than girls are.
Family history. Families who have one child with autism spectrum disorder have an increased risk of having another child with the disorder. It's also not uncommon for parents or relatives of a child with autism spectrum disorder to have minor problems with social or communication skills themselves or to engage in certain behaviors typical of the disorder.
Other disorders. Children with certain medical conditions have a higher than normal risk of autism spectrum disorder or autism-like symptoms. Examples include fragile X syndrome, an inherited disorder that causes intellectual problems; tuberous sclerosis, a condition in which benign tumors develop in the brain; and Rett syndrome, a genetic condition occurring almost exclusively in girls, which causes slowing of head growth, intellectual disability and loss of purposeful hand use.
Extremely preterm babies. Babies born before 26 weeks of gestation may have a greater risk of autism spectrum disorder.
Parents' ages. There may be a connection between children born to older parents and autism spectrum disorder, but more research is necessary to establish this link.
Problems with social interactions, communication and behavior can lead to: Problems in school and with successful learning, Employment problems, Inability to live independently, Social isolation, Stress within the family, Victimization and being bullied.
Signs and symptoms of autoimmune hepatitis vary from person to person and may come on suddenly. Some people have few, if any, recognized problems in the early stages of the disease, whereas others experience signs and symptoms that may include: Fatigue, Abdominal discomfort, Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), An enlarged liver, Abnormal blood vessels on the skin (spider angiomas), Skin rashes, Joint pains, Loss of menstrual periods.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you.
Autoimmune hepatitis occurs when the body's immune system, which ordinarily attacks viruses, bacteria and other pathogens, instead targets the liver. This attack on your liver can lead to chronic inflammation and serious damage to liver cells. Just why the body turns against itself is unclear, but researchers think autoimmune hepatitis could be caused by the interaction of genes controlling immune system function and exposure to particular viruses or drugs.
Doctors have identified two main forms of autoimmune hepatitis.
Type 1 autoimmune hepatitis. This is the most common type of the disease. It can occur at any age. About half the people with type 1 autoimmune hepatitis have other autoimmune disorders, such as celiac disease, rheumatoid arthritis or ulcerative colitis.
Type 2 autoimmune hepatitis. Although adults can develop type 2 autoimmune hepatitis, it's most common in children and young people. Other autoimmune diseases may accompany this type of autoimmune hepatitis.
Factors that may increase your risk of autoimmune hepatitis include:
Being female. Although both males and females can develop autoimmune hepatitis, the disease is more common in females.
A history of certain infections. Autoimmune hepatitis may develop after you're infected with the measles, herpes simplex or Epstein-Barr virus. The disease is also linked to hepatitis A, B or C infection.
Heredity. Evidence suggests that a predisposition to autoimmune hepatitis may run in families.
Having an autoimmune disease. People who already have an autoimmune disease, such as celiac disease, rheumatoid arthritis or hyperthyroidism (Graves' disease or Hashimoto's thyroiditis), may be more likely to develop autoimmune hepatitis.
Autoimmune hepatitis that goes untreated can cause permanent scarring of the liver tissue (cirrhosis). Complications of cirrhosis include:
Enlarged veins in your esophagus (esophageal varices). When circulation through the portal vein is blocked, blood may back up into other blood vessels — mainly those in your stomach and esophagus. The blood vessels are thin walled, and because they're filled with more blood than they're meant to carry, they're likely to bleed. Massive bleeding in the esophagus or stomach from these blood vessels is a life-threatening emergency that requires immediate medical care.
Fluid in your abdomen (ascites). Liver disease can cause large amounts of fluid to accumulate in your abdomen. Ascites can be uncomfortable and may interfere with breathing and is usually a sign of advanced cirrhosis.
Liver failure. This occurs when extensive damage to liver cells makes it impossible for your liver to function adequately. At this point, a liver transplant is needed.
Liver cancer. People with cirrhosis have an increased risk of liver cancer.
Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) is difficult to diagnose. Often, it doesn't cause any symptoms. When it does, its symptoms and signs are similar to those of pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer symptoms can include: Dark urine, Pale stools or stools that float in the toilet, Yellow skin and eyes (jaundice), Pain in your upper abdomen or middle part of your back, Nausea and vomiting, Weakness or extreme tiredness, Loss of appetite or feelings of fullness, Weight loss for no known reason.
The most common sign of autoimmune pancreatitis, present in about 80 percent of people, is painless jaundice, caused by blocked bile ducts. AIP can also cause weight loss. Many people with autoimmune pancreatitis have masses in the pancreas and other organs, which can be misdiagnosed as cancer.
Other differences between type 1 and type 2 AIP are:
In type 1 AIP, the disease may affect other organs in addition to the pancreas. Type 2 AIP affects only the pancreas, although the disease is associated with another autoimmune condition, inflammatory bowel disease.
Type 1 AIP responds rapidly to treatment with steroids.
Type 1 AIP is likely to relapse if treatment is discontinued.
Autoimmune pancreatitis often doesn't cause any symptoms. See your doctor, however, if you experience unexplained weight loss, abdominal pain, jaundice, or other signs and symptoms that bother you.
Doctors don't know what causes autoimmune pancreatitis, but as in other autoimmune diseases, the body's immune system attacks healthy body tissue.
The two types of AIP occur with different frequency in different parts of the world. In the United States, about 80 percent of people with autoimmune pancreatitis have type 1.
People with type 1 autoimmune pancreatitis often: Are over age 60, Are male.
People with type 2 autoimmune pancreatitis: Are often over age 40 (one or two decades younger than those with type 1), Are as likely to be female as male, Are more likely to have inflammatory bowel disease, such as ulcerative colitis.
Autoimmune pancreatitis can cause a variety of complications.
Pancreatic insufficiency. AIP may affect the ability of your pancreas to make enough enzymes. Signs and symptoms may include diarrhea, weight loss, metabolic bone disease, and vitamin or mineral deficiency.
Diabetes. Because the pancreas is the organ that produces insulin, damage to it may cause diabetes, and you may need treatment with oral medication or insulin.
Pancreatic calcifications or stones.
Treatments for autoimmune pancreatitis, such as long-term steroid use, also can cause complications. However, even with these complications, people who are treated for autoimmune pancreatitis have a normal life expectancy.
There is no established association between AIP and pancreatic cancer.
Signs and symptoms of autonomic neuropathy depend on the nerves affected. They might include:
Dizziness and fainting when standing, caused by a sudden drop in blood pressure.
Urinary problems, such as difficulty starting urination, incontinence, difficulty sensing a full bladder and inability to completely empty the bladder, which can lead to urinary tract infections.
Sexual difficulties, including problems achieving or maintaining an erection (erectile dysfunction) or ejaculation problems in men. In women, problems include vaginal dryness, low libido and difficulty reaching orgasm.
Difficulty digesting food, such as feeling full after a few bites of food, loss of appetite, diarrhea, constipation, abdominal bloating, nausea, vomiting, difficulty swallowing and heartburn, all due to changes in digestive function.
Inability to recognize low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), because the warning signals, such as getting shaky, aren't there.
Sweating abnormalities, such as sweating too much or too little, which affect the ability to regulate body temperature.
Sluggish pupil reaction, making it difficult to adjust from light to dark and seeing well when driving at night.
Exercise intolerance, which can occur if your heart rate stays the same instead of adjusting to your activity level.
Seek medical care promptly if you begin having any of the signs and symptoms of autonomic neuropathy, particularly if you have diabetes that's poorly controlled.
If you have type 2 diabetes, the American Diabetes Association recommends annual autonomic neuropathy screening beginning when you receive your diagnosis. For people with type 1 diabetes, the association advises annual screening beginning five years after diagnosis.
Many health conditions can cause autonomic neuropathy. It can also be a side effect of treatments for other diseases, such as cancer. Some common causes of autonomic neuropathy include:
Diabetes, especially when poorly controlled, is the most common cause of autonomic neuropathy. Diabetes can gradually cause nerve damage throughout the body.
Abnormal protein buildup in organs (amyloidosis), which affects the organs and the nervous system.
Autoimmune diseases, in which your immune system attacks and damages parts of your body, including your nerves. Examples include Sjogren's syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis and celiac disease. Guillain-Barre syndrome is an autoimmune disease that happens rapidly and can affect autonomic nerves.
An abnormal attack by the immune system that occurs as a result of some cancers (paraneoplastic syndrome) is another possible cause.
Certain medications, including some drugs used in cancer treatment (chemotherapy).
Some viruses and bacteria, such as HIV and those that cause botulism and Lyme disease.
Certain inherited disorders also can cause autonomic neuropathy.
Factors that might increase your risk of autonomic neuropathy include:
Diabetes. Diabetes, especially when poorly controlled, increases your risk of autonomic neuropathy and other nerve damage. You're at greatest risk if you have difficulty controlling your blood sugar.
Other diseases. Amyloidosis, porphyria, hypothyroidism and cancer (usually due to side effects from treatment) also can increase the risk of autonomic neuropathy.
Many people have no symptoms in the early stages of avascular necrosis. As the condition worsens, your affected joint might hurt only when you put weight on it. Eventually, you might feel the pain even when you're lying down.
Pain can be mild or severe and usually develops gradually. Pain associated with avascular necrosis of the hip might center on the groin, thigh or buttock. Besides the hip, the areas likely to be affected are the shoulder, knee, hand and foot.
Some people develop avascular necrosis on both sides (bilaterally) — such as in both hips or in both knees.
See your doctor if you have persistent pain in any joint. Seek immediate medical attention if you believe you have a broken bone or a dislocated joint.
Avascular necrosis occurs when blood flow to a bone is interrupted or reduced. Reduced blood supply can be caused by:
Joint or bone trauma. An injury, such as a dislocated joint, might damage nearby blood vessels. Cancer treatments involving radiation also can weaken bone and harm blood vessels.
Fatty deposits in blood vessels. The fat (lipids) can block small blood vessels, reducing the blood flow that feeds bones.
Certain diseases. Medical conditions, such as sickle cell anemia and Gaucher's disease, also can cause diminished blood flow to bone.
For about 25 percent of people with avascular necrosis, the cause of interrupted blood flow is unknown.
Risk factors for developing avascular necrosis include:
Trauma. Injuries, such as hip dislocation or fracture, can damage nearby blood vessels and reduce blood flow to bones.
Steroid use. Use of high-dose corticosteroids, such as prednisone, is a common cause of avascular necrosis. The reason is unknown, but one hypothesis is that corticosteroids can increase lipid levels in your blood, reducing blood flow.
Excessive alcohol use. Consuming several alcoholic drinks a day for several years also can cause fatty deposits to form in your blood vessels.
Bisphosphonate use. Long-term use of medications to increase bone density might contribute to developing osteonecrosis of the jaw. This rare complication has occurred in some people treated with high doses of these medications for cancers, such as multiple myeloma and metastatic breast cancer.
Certain medical treatments. Radiation therapy for cancer can weaken bone. Organ transplantation, especially kidney transplant, also is associated with avascular necrosis.
Medical conditions associated with avascular necrosis include: Pancreatitis, Diabetes, Gaucher's disease, HIV/AIDS, Systemic lupus erythematosus, Sickle cell anemia.
Untreated, avascular necrosis worsens with time. Eventually, the bone can collapse. Avascular necrosis also causes bone to lose its smooth shape, potentially leading to severe arthritis.
Baby acne is usually characterized by small red or white bumps on a baby's cheeks, nose and forehead. It often develops within the first two to four weeks after birth.
Many babies also develop tiny white bumps on the nose, chin or cheeks. These are known as milia.
Consult your baby's doctor if you're concerned about any aspect of your baby's complexion. Baby acne usually clears up within three to four months.
It's not clear exactly what causes baby acne.
Back pain can range from a muscle aching to a shooting, burning or stabbing sensation. In addition, the pain may radiate down your leg or worsen with bending, twisting, lifting, standing or walking.
Most back pain gradually improves with home treatment and self-care, usually within a few weeks. Contact your doctor if your back pain: Persists past a few weeks, Is severe and doesn't improve with rest, Spreads down one or both legs, especially if the pain extends below the knee, Causes weakness, numbness or tingling in one or both legs, Is accompanied by unexplained weight loss.
In rare cases, back pain can signal a serious medical problem. Seek immediate care if your back pain: Causes new bowel or bladder problems, Is accompanied by a fever, Follows a fall, blow to your back or other injury.
Back pain often develops without a cause that your doctor can identify with a test or an imaging study. Conditions commonly linked to back pain include:
Muscle or ligament strain. Repeated heavy lifting or a sudden awkward movement can strain back muscles and spinal ligaments. If you're in poor physical condition, constant strain on your back can cause painful muscle spasms.
Bulging or ruptured disks. Disks act as cushions between the bones (vertebrae) in your spine. The soft material inside a disk can bulge or rupture and press on a nerve. However, you can have a bulging or ruptured disk without back pain. Disk disease is often found incidentally when you have spine X-rays for some other reason.
Arthritis. Osteoarthritis can affect the lower back. In some cases, arthritis in the spine can lead to a narrowing of the space around the spinal cord, a condition called spinal stenosis.
Osteoporosis. Your spine's vertebrae can develop painful fractures if your bones become porous and brittle.
Anyone can develop back pain, even children and teens. These factors might put you at greater risk of developing back pain:
Age. Back pain is more common as you get older, starting around age 30 or 40.
Lack of exercise. Weak, unused muscles in your back and abdomen might lead to back pain.
Excess weight. Excess body weight puts extra stress on your back.
Diseases. Some types of arthritis and cancer can contribute to back pain.
Improper lifting. Using your back instead of your legs can lead to back pain.
Psychological conditions. People prone to depression and anxiety appear to have a greater risk of back pain.
Smoking. Smokers have increased rates of back pain. This may occur because smoking prompts more coughing, which can lead to herniated disks. Smoking can also decrease blood flow to the spine and increase the risk of osteoporosis.
Bacterial vaginosis signs and symptoms may include: Thin, gray, white or green vaginal discharge, Foul-smelling "fishy" vaginal odor, Vaginal itching, Burning during urination.
Many women with bacterial vaginosis have no signs or symptoms.
Make an appointment to see your doctor if:
You have vaginal discharge that's new and associated with an odor or fever. Your doctor can help determine the cause and identify signs and symptoms.
You've had vaginal infections before, but the color and consistency of your discharge seems different this time.
You have multiple sex partners or a recent new partner. Sometimes, the signs and symptoms of a sexually transmitted infection are similar to those of bacterial vaginosis.
You try self-treatment for a yeast infection with an over-the-counter treatment and your symptoms persist.
Bacterial vaginosis results from overgrowth of one of several bacteria naturally found in your vagina. Usually, "good" bacteria (lactobacilli) outnumber "bad" bacteria (anaerobes). But if there are too many anaerobic bacteria, they upset the natural balance of microorganisms in your vagina and cause bacterial vaginosis.
Risk factors for bacterial vaginosis include:
Having multiple sex partners or a new sex partner. Doctors don't fully understand the link between sexual activity and bacterial vaginosis, but the condition occurs more often in women who have multiple sex partners or a new sex partner. Bacterial vaginosis also occurs more frequently in women who have sex with women.
Douching. The practice of rinsing out your vagina with water or a cleansing agent (douching) upsets the natural balance of your vagina. This can lead to an overgrowth of anaerobic bacteria, and cause bacterial vaginosis. Since the vagina is self-cleaning, douching isn't necessary.
Natural lack of lactobacilli bacteria. If your natural vaginal environment doesn't produce enough of the good lactobacilli bacteria, you're more likely to develop bacterial vaginosis.
Bacterial vaginosis doesn't generally cause complications. Sometimes, having bacterial vaginosis may lead to:
Preterm birth. In pregnant women, bacterial vaginosis is linked to premature deliveries and low birth weight babies.
Sexually transmitted infections. Having bacterial vaginosis makes women more susceptible to sexually transmitted infections, such as HIV, herpes simplex virus, chlamydia or gonorrhea. If you have HIV, bacterial vaginosis increases the odds that you'll pass the virus on to your partner.
Infection risk after gynecologic surgery. Having bacterial vaginosis may increase the risk of developing a post-surgical infection after procedures such as hysterectomy or dilation and curettage (D&C).
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). Bacterial vaginosis can sometimes cause PID, an infection of the uterus and the fallopian tubes that can increase the risk of infertility.
Bad breath odors vary, depending on the source or the underlying cause. Some people worry too much about their breath even though they have little or no mouth odor, while others have bad breath and don't know it. Because it's difficult to assess how your own breath smells, ask a close friend or relative to confirm your bad-breath questions.
If you have bad breath, review your oral hygiene habits. Try making lifestyle changes, such as brushing your teeth and tongue after eating, using dental floss, and drinking plenty of water.
If your bad breath persists after making such changes, see your dentist. If your dentist suspects a more serious condition is causing your bad breath, he or she may refer you to a physician to find the cause of the odor.
Most bad breath starts in your mouth, and there are many possible causes. They include:
Food. The breakdown of food particles in and around your teeth can increase bacteria and cause a foul odor. Eating certain foods, such as onions, garlic and spices, also can cause bad breath. After you digest these foods, they enter your bloodstream, are carried to your lungs and affect your breath.
Tobacco products. Smoking causes its own unpleasant mouth odor. Smokers and oral tobacco users are also more likely to have gum disease, another source of bad breath.
Poor dental hygiene. If you don't brush and floss daily, food particles remain in your mouth, causing bad breath. A colorless, sticky film of bacteria (plaque) forms on your teeth. If not brushed away, plaque can irritate your gums and eventually form plaque-filled pockets between your teeth and gums (periodontitis). Your tongue also can trap bacteria that produce odors. Dentures that aren't cleaned regularly or don't fit properly can harbor odor-causing bacteria and food particles.
Dry mouth. Saliva helps cleanse your mouth, removing particles that cause bad odors. A condition called dry mouth or xerostomia (zeer–o-STOE-me-uh) can contribute to bad breath because production of saliva is decreased. Dry mouth naturally occurs during sleep, leading to "morning breath," and it worsens if you sleep with your mouth open. Chronic dry mouth can be caused by a problem with your salivary glands and some diseases.
Medications. Some medications can indirectly produce bad breath by contributing to dry mouth. Others can be broken down in the body to release chemicals that can be carried on your breath.
Infections in your mouth. Bad breath can be caused by surgical wounds after oral surgery, such as tooth removal, or as a result of tooth decay, gum disease or mouth sores.
Other mouth, nose and throat conditions. Bad breath can occasionally stem from small stones that form in the tonsils and are covered with bacteria that produce odor. Infections or chronic inflammation in the nose, sinuses or throat, which can contribute to postnasal drip, also can cause bad breath.
Other causes. Diseases, such as some cancers, and conditions such as metabolic disorders, can cause a distinctive breath odor as a result of chemicals they produce. Chronic reflux of stomach acids (gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD) can be associated with bad breath. Bad breath in young children can be caused by a foreign body, such as a piece of food, lodged in a nostril.
Bags under eyes can include: Mild swelling, Saggy or loose skin, Dark circles.
You may not like the way they look, but bags under eyes are usually harmless and don't require medical care. See your doctor if the swelling is severe, persistent, painful, itchy or red.
Your doctor will want to rule out other possible causes that can contribute to the swelling, such as thyroid disease, infection or an allergy. He or she may refer you to a doctor who specializes in the eyes (ophthalmologist), plastic surgery or plastic surgery of the eyes (oculoplastic surgeon).
As you age, the tissue structures and muscles supporting your eyelids weaken. The skin may start to sag, and fat that is normally confined to the area around the eye (orbit) can move into the area below your eyes. Also, the space below your eyes can accumulate fluid, making the under-eye area appear puffy or swollen. Several factors cause or worsen this effect, including: Fluid retention, especially upon waking or after a salty meal, Lack of sleep, Allergies, Smoking, Heredity — under-eye bags can run in families.
In some cases, a Baker's cyst causes no pain, and you may not notice it. If you do have signs and symptoms, they might include: Swelling behind your knee, and sometimes in your leg, Knee pain, Stiffness and inability to fully flex the knee.
Your symptoms may be worse after you've been active or if you've been standing for a long time.
If you have pain and swelling behind your knee, see your doctor. Though unlikely, a bulge behind your knee may be a sign of a condition more serious than a fluid-filled cyst.
A lubricating fluid called synovial (sih-NO-vee-ul) fluid helps your leg swing smoothly and reduces friction between the moving parts of your knee.
But sometimes the knee produces too much synovial fluid, resulting in buildup of fluid in an area on the back of your knee (popliteal bursa), causing a Baker's cyst. This can happen because of: Inflammation of the knee joint, such as occurs with various types of arthritis, A knee injury, such as a cartilage tear.
Rarely, a Baker's cyst bursts and synovial fluid leaks into the calf region, causing: Sharp pain in your knee, Swelling in the calf, Sometimes, redness of your calf or a feeling of water running down your calf.
These signs and symptoms closely resemble those of a blood clot in a vein in your leg. If you have swelling and redness of your calf, you'll need prompt medical evaluation to rule out a more serious cause of your symptoms.
Signs and symptoms of balance problems include: Sense of motion or spinning (vertigo), Feeling of faintness or lightheadedness (presyncope), Loss of balance or unsteadiness, Falling or feeling like you might fall, Feeling a floating sensation or dizziness, Vision changes, such as blurriness, Confusion.
Balance problems can be caused by several different conditions. The cause of balance problems is usually related to the specific sign or symptom.
Vertigo can be associated with many conditions, including:
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). BPPV occurs when calcium crystals in your inner ear — which help control your balance — are dislodged from their normal positions and move elsewhere in the inner ear. BPPV is the most common cause of vertigo in adults. You might experience a spinning sensation when turning in bed or tilting your head back to look up.
Vestibular neuritis. This inflammatory disorder, probably caused by a virus, can affect the nerves in the balance portion of your inner ear. Symptoms are often severe and persistent, and include nausea and difficulty walking. Symptoms can last several days and gradually improve without treatment. This is a common disorder second to BPPV in adults.
Persistent postural-perceptual dizziness. This disorder occurs frequently with other types of vertigo. Symptoms include unsteadiness or a sensation of motion in your head. Symptoms often worsen when you watch objects move, when you read or when you are in a visually complex environment such as a shopping mall. This is the third most common disorder in adults.
Meniere's disease. In addition to sudden and severe vertigo, Meniere's disease can cause fluctuating hearing loss and buzzing, ringing or a feeling of fullness in your ear. The cause of Meniere's disease isn't fully known. Meniere's disease is rare and typically develops in people who are between the ages of 20 and 40.
Migraine. Dizziness and sensitivity to motion (vestibular migraine) can occur due to migraine. Migraine is a common cause of dizziness.
Acoustic neuroma. This noncancerous (benign), slow-growing tumor develops on a nerve that affects your hearing and balance. You might experience dizziness or loss of balance, but the most common symptoms are hearing loss and ringing in your ear. Acoustic neuroma is a rare condition.
Ramsay Hunt syndrome. Also known as herpes zoster oticus, this condition occurs when a shingles-like infection affects the facial, auditory and vestibular nerves near one of your ears. You might experience vertigo, ear pain, facial weakness and hearing loss.
Head injury. You might experience vertigo due to a concussion or other head injury.
Motion sickness. You might experience dizziness in boats, cars and airplanes, or on amusement park rides. Motion sickness is common in people with migraines.
Lightheadedness can be associated with:
Hemodynamic orthostatic hypotension (postural hypotension). Standing or sitting up too quickly can cause some people to experience a significant drop in their blood pressure, resulting in feeling lightheaded or faint.
Cardiovascular disease. Abnormal heart rhythms (heart arrhythmia), narrowed or blocked blood vessels, a thickened heart muscle (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), or a decrease in blood volume can reduce blood flow and cause lightheadedness or a fainting feeling.
Losing your balance while walking, or feeling imbalanced, can result from:
Vestibular problems. Abnormalities in your inner ear can cause a sensation of a floating or heavy head and unsteadiness in the dark.
Nerve damage to your legs (peripheral neuropathy). The damage can lead to difficulties with walking.
Joint, muscle or vision problems. Muscle weakness and unstable joints can contribute to your loss of balance. Difficulties with eyesight also can lead to unsteadiness.
Medications. Loss of balance or unsteadiness can be a side effect of medications.
Certain neurological conditions. These include cervical spondylosis and Parkinson's disease.
A sense of dizziness or lightheadedness can result from:
Inner ear problems. Abnormalities of the vestibular system can lead to a sensation of floating or other false sensation of motion.
Psychiatric disorders. Depression (major depressive disorder), anxiety and other psychiatric disorders can cause dizziness.
Abnormally rapid breathing (hyperventilation). This condition often accompanies anxiety disorders and may cause lightheadedness.
Medications. Lightheadedness can be a side effect of medications.
The development of Barrett's esophagus is most often attributed to long-standing GERD, which may include these signs and symptoms: Frequent heartburn and regurgitation of stomach contents, Difficulty swallowing food, Less commonly, chest pain.
Curiously, approximately half of the people diagnosed with Barrett's esophagus report little if any symptoms of acid reflux. So, you should discuss your digestive health with your doctor regarding the possibility of Barrett's esophagus.
If you've had trouble with heartburn, regurgitation and acid reflux for more than five years, then you should ask your doctor about your risk of Barrett's esophagus.
Seek immediate help if you: Have chest pain, which may be a symptom of a heart attack, Have difficulty swallowing, Are vomiting red blood or blood that looks like coffee grounds, Are passing black, tarry or bloody stools, Are unintentionally losing weight.
The exact cause of Barrett's esophagus isn't known. While many people with Barrett's esophagus have long-standing GERD, many have no reflux symptoms, a condition often called "silent reflux."
Whether this acid reflux is accompanied by GERD symptoms or not, stomach acid and chemicals wash back into the esophagus, damaging esophagus tissue and triggering changes to the lining of the swallowing tube, causing Barrett's esophagus.
Factors that increase your risk of Barrett's esophagus include:
Family history. Your odds of having Barrett's esophagus increase if you have a family history of Barrett's esophagus or esophageal cancer.
Being male. Men are far more likely to develop Barrett's esophagus.
Being white. White people have a greater risk of the disease than do people of other races.
Age. Barrett's esophagus can occur at any age but is more common in adults over 50.
Chronic heartburn and acid reflux. Having GERD that doesn't get better when taking medications known as proton pump inhibitors or having GERD that requires regular medication can increase the risk of Barrett's esophagus.
Current or past smoking.
Being overweight. Body fat around your abdomen further increases your risk.
People with Barrett's esophagus have an increased risk of esophageal cancer. The risk is small, even in people who have precancerous changes in their esophagus cells. Fortunately, most people with Barrett's esophagus will never develop esophageal cancer.
If you have a small, noninfected Bartholin's cyst, you may not notice it. If the cyst grows, you might feel a lump or mass near your vaginal opening. Although a cyst is usually painless, it can be tender.
A full-blown infection of a Bartholin's cyst can occur in a matter of days. If the cyst becomes infected, you may experience: A tender, painful lump near the vaginal opening, Discomfort while walking or sitting, Pain during intercourse, Fever.
A Bartholin's cyst or abscess typically occurs on only one side of the vaginal opening.
Call your doctor if you have a painful lump near the opening of your vagina that doesn't improve after two or three days of self-care — for instance, soaking the area in warm water (sitz bath). If the pain is severe, make an appointment with your doctor right away.
Also call your doctor promptly if you find a new lump near your vaginal opening and you're older than 40. Although rare, such a lump may be a sign of a more serious problem, such as cancer.
Experts believe that the cause of a Bartholin's cyst is a backup of fluid. Fluid may accumulate when the opening of the gland (duct) becomes obstructed, perhaps caused by infection or injury.
A Bartholin's cyst can become infected, forming an abscess. A number of bacteria may cause the infection, including Escherichia coli (E. coli) and bacteria that cause sexually transmitted infections such as gonorrhea and chlamydia.
A Bartholin's cyst or abscess may recur and again require treatment.
Basal cell carcinoma usually develops on sun-exposed parts of your body, especially your head and neck. Less often, basal cell carcinoma can develop on parts of your body usually protected from the sun, such as the genitals.
Basal cell carcinoma appears as a change in the skin, such as a growth or a sore that won't heal. These changes in the skin (lesions) usually have one of the following characteristics:
A pearly white, skin-colored or pink bump that is translucent, meaning you can see a bit through the surface. Tiny blood vessels are often visible. In people with darker skin tones, the lesion may be darker but still somewhat translucent. The most common type of basal cell carcinoma, this lesion often appears on the face and ears. The lesion may rupture, bleed and scab over.
A brown, black or blue lesion — or a lesion with dark spots — with a slightly raised, translucent border.
A flat, scaly, reddish patch with a raised edge is more common on the back or chest. Over time, these patches can grow quite large.
A white, waxy, scar-like lesion without a clearly defined border, called morpheaform basal cell carcinoma, is the least common.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you observe changes in the appearance of your skin, such as a new growth, a change in a previous growth or a recurring sore.
Basal cell carcinoma occurs when one of the skin's basal cells develops a mutation in its DNA.
Basal cells are found at the bottom of the epidermis — the outermost layer of skin. Basal cells produce new skin cells. As new skin cells are produced, they push older cells toward the skin's surface, where the old cells die and are sloughed off.
The process of creating new skin cells is controlled by a basal cell's DNA. The DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The mutation tells the basal cell to multiply rapidly and continue growing when it would normally die. Eventually the accumulating abnormal cells may form a cancerous tumor — the lesion that appears on the skin.
Much of the damage to DNA in basal cells is thought to result from ultraviolet (UV) radiation found in sunlight and in commercial tanning lamps and tanning beds. But sun exposure doesn't explain skin cancers that develop on skin not ordinarily exposed to sunlight. Other factors can contribute to the risk and development of basal cell carcinoma, and the exact cause may in some cases not be clear.
Factors that increase your risk of basal cell carcinoma include:
Chronic sun exposure. A lot of time spent in the sun — or in commercial tanning beds — increases the risk of basal cell carcinoma. The threat is greater if you live in a sunny or high-altitude location, both of which expose you to more UV radiation. Severe sunburns also increase your risk.
Radiation therapy. Radiation therapy to treat acne or other skin conditions may increase the risk of basal cell carcinoma at previous treatment sites on the skin.
Fair skin. The risk of basal cell carcinoma is higher among people who freckle or burn easily or who have very light skin, red or blond hair, or light-colored eyes.
Increasing age. Because basal cell carcinoma often takes decades to develop, the majority of basal cell carcinomas occur in older adults. But it can also affect younger adults and is becoming more common in people in their 20s and 30s.
A personal or family history of skin cancer. If you've had basal cell carcinoma one or more times, you have a good chance of developing it again. If you have a family history of skin cancer, you may have an increased risk of developing basal cell carcinoma.
Immune-suppressing drugs. Taking medications that suppress your immune system, such as anti-rejection drugs used after transplant surgery, significantly increases your risk of skin cancer.
Exposure to arsenic. Arsenic, a toxic metal that's found widely in the environment, increases the risk of basal cell carcinoma and other cancers. Everyone has some arsenic exposure because it occurs naturally. But some people may have higher exposure if they drink contaminated well water or have a job that involves producing or using arsenic.
Inherited syndromes that cause skin cancer. Certain rare genetic diseases can increase the risk of basal cell carcinoma, including nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (Gorlin-Goltz syndrome) and xeroderma pigmentosum.
Complications of basal cell carcinoma can include:
A risk of recurrence. Basal cell carcinomas commonly recur, even after successful treatment.
An increased risk of other types of skin cancer. A history of basal cell carcinoma may also increase the chance of developing other types of skin cancer, such as squamous cell carcinoma.
Cancer that spreads beyond the skin. Very rarely, basal cell carcinoma can spread (metastasize) to nearby lymph nodes and other areas of the body, such as the bones and lungs.
Most kids are fully toilet trained by age 5, but there's really no target date for developing complete bladder control. Between the ages of 5 and 7, bed-wetting remains a problem for some children. After 7 years of age, a small number of children still wet the bed.
Most children outgrow bed-wetting on their own — but some need a little help. In other cases, bed-wetting may be a sign of an underlying condition that needs medical attention.
Consult your child's doctor if: Your child still wets the bed after age 7, Your child starts to wet the bed after a few months of being dry at night, Bed-wetting is accompanied by painful urination, unusual thirst, pink or red urine, hard stools, or snoring.
No one knows for sure what causes bed-wetting, but various factors may play a role:
A small bladder. Your child's bladder may not be developed enough to hold urine produced during the night.
Inability to recognize a full bladder. If the nerves that control the bladder are slow to mature, a full bladder may not wake your child — especially if your child is a deep sleeper.
A hormone imbalance. During childhood, some kids don't produce enough anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) to slow nighttime urine production.
Urinary tract infection. This infection can make it difficult for your child to control urination. Signs and symptoms may include bed-wetting, daytime accidents, frequent urination, red or pink urine, and pain during urination.
Sleep apnea. Sometimes bed-wetting is a sign of obstructive sleep apnea, a condition in which the child's breathing is interrupted during sleep — often due to inflamed or enlarged tonsils or adenoids. Other signs and symptoms may include snoring and daytime drowsiness.
Diabetes. For a child who's usually dry at night, bed-wetting may be the first sign of diabetes. Other signs and symptoms may include passing large amounts of urine at once, increased thirst, fatigue and weight loss in spite of a good appetite.
Chronic constipation. The same muscles are used to control urine and stool elimination. When constipation is long term, these muscles can become dysfunctional and contribute to bed-wetting at night.
A structural problem in the urinary tract or nervous system. Rarely, bed-wetting is related to a defect in the child's neurological system or urinary system.
Bed-wetting can affect anyone, but it's twice as common in boys as in girls. Several factors have been associated with an increased risk of bed-wetting, including:
Stress and anxiety. Stressful events — such as becoming a big brother or sister, starting a new school, or sleeping away from home — may trigger bed-wetting.
Family history. If one or both of a child's parents wet the bed as children, their child has a significant chance of wetting the bed, too.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Bed-wetting is more common in children who have ADHD.
Although frustrating, bed-wetting without a physical cause doesn't pose any health risks. However, bed-wetting can create some issues for your child, including: Guilt and embarrassment, which can lead to low self-esteem, Loss of opportunities for social activities, such as sleepovers and camp, Rashes on the child's bottom and genital area — especially if your child sleeps in wet underwear.
It can be difficult to distinguish bedbug bites from other insect bites or rashes. In general, the sites of bedbug bites usually are: Red, often with a darker red spot in the middle, Itchy, Arranged in a rough line or in a cluster, Located on the face, neck, arms and hands.
Some people have no reaction to bedbug bites, while others experience an allergic reaction that can include severe itching, blisters or hives.
If you experience allergic reactions or severe skin reactions to bedbug bites, see your doctor for professional treatment.
Bedbug infestations may be linked to: Increased international travel, Changes in pest control practices, Insecticide resistance.
Bedbug infestations usually occur around or near where people sleep. They hide in the cracks and crevices of: Mattresses, Box springs, Bed frame, Headboards, Objects or clutter near beds.
They can also be found: Under peeling paint and loose wallpaper, Under carpeting near baseboards, In upholstered furniture seams, Under light switch plates or electrical outlets.
Bedbugs can move from one site to another by traveling on items such as clothing, luggage, furniture, boxes and bedding.
Bedbugs can crawl about as fast as a ladybug, and can easily travel between floors and rooms in hotels or apartment complexes.
Bedbugs don't care if their environment is clean or dirty. All they need is a warm host and plenty of hiding places.
Bedbugs are more common in crowded lodgings that experience high turnover in occupancy, such as: Apartment complexes, Dorm rooms, Homeless shelters, Hotels, Cruise ships, Trains and buses, Refugee camps.
Warning signs of bedsores or pressure ulcers are: Unusual changes in skin color or texture, Swelling, Pus-like draining, An area of skin that feels cooler or warmer to the touch than other areas, Tender areas.
Bedsores fall into one of several stages based on their depth, severity and other characteristics. The degree of skin and tissue damage ranges from red, unbroken skin to a deep injury involving muscle and bone.
For people who use wheelchairs, bedsores often occur on skin over the following sites: Tailbone or buttocks, Shoulder blades and spine, Backs of arms and legs where they rest against the chair.
For people who need to stay in bed, bedsores may happen on: The back or sides of the head, The shoulder blades, The hip, lower back or tailbone, The heels, ankles and skin behind the knees.
If you notice warning signs of a bedsore, change your position to relieve the pressure on the area. If you don't see improvement in 24 to 48 hours, contact your doctor.
Seek immediate medical care if you show signs of infection, such as a fever, drainage from a sore, a sore that smells bad, or increased redness, warmth or swelling around a sore.
Bedsores are caused by pressure against the skin that limits blood flow to the skin. Limited movement can make skin vulnerable to damage and lead to development of bedsores.
Three primary contributing factors for bedsores are:
Pressure. Constant pressure on any part of your body can lessen the blood flow to tissues. Blood flow is essential for delivering oxygen and other nutrients to tissues. Without these essential nutrients, skin and nearby tissues are damaged and might eventually die.
For people with limited mobility, this kind of pressure tends to happen in areas that aren't well padded with muscle or fat and that lie over a bone, such as the spine, tailbone, shoulder blades, hips, heels and elbows.
Friction. Friction occurs when the skin rubs against clothing or bedding. It can make fragile skin more vulnerable to injury, especially if the skin is also moist.
Shear. Shear occurs when two surfaces move in the opposite direction. For example, when a bed is elevated at the head, you can slide down in bed. As the tailbone moves down, the skin over the bone might stay in place — essentially pulling in the opposite direction.
Your risk of developing bedsores is higher if you have difficulty moving and can't change position easily while seated or in bed. Risk factors include:
Immobility. This might be due to poor health, spinal cord injury and other causes.
Incontinence. Skin becomes more vulnerable with extended exposure to urine and stool.
Lack of sensory perception. Spinal cord injuries, neurological disorders and other conditions can result in a loss of sensation. An inability to feel pain or discomfort can result in not being aware of warning signs and the need to change position.
Poor nutrition and hydration. People need enough fluids, calories, protein, vitamins and minerals in their daily diets to maintain healthy skin and prevent the breakdown of tissues.
Medical conditions affecting blood flow. Health problems that can affect blood flow, such as diabetes and vascular disease, can increase the risk of tissue damage such as bedsores.
Complications of pressure ulcers, some life-threatening, include:
Cellulitis. Cellulitis is an infection of the skin and connected soft tissues. It can cause warmth, redness and swelling of the affected area. People with nerve damage often do not feel pain in the area affected by cellulitis.
Bone and joint infections. An infection from a pressure sore can burrow into joints and bones. Joint infections (septic arthritis) can damage cartilage and tissue. Bone infections (osteomyelitis) can reduce the function of joints and limbs.
Cancer. Long-term, nonhealing wounds (Marjolin's ulcers) can develop into a type of squamous cell carcinoma.
Sepsis. Rarely, a skin ulcer leads to sepsis.
Bee stings can produce different reactions, ranging from temporary pain and discomfort to a severe allergic reaction. Having one type of reaction doesn't mean you'll always have the same reaction every time you're stung or that the next reaction will necessarily be more severe.
Most of the time, bee sting symptoms are minor and include: Instant, sharp burning pain at the sting site, A red welt at the sting area, Slight swelling around the sting area.
In most people, the swelling and pain go away within a few hours.
Some people who get stung by a bee or other insect have a bit stronger reaction, with signs and symptoms such as: Extreme redness, Swelling at the site of the sting that gradually enlarges over the next day or two.
Moderate reactions tend to resolve over five to 10 days. Having a moderate reaction doesn't mean you'll have a severe allergic reaction the next time you're stung. But some people develop similar moderate reactions each time they're stung. If this happens to you, talk to your doctor about treatment and prevention, especially if the reaction becomes more severe each time.
A severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to bee stings is potentially life-threatening and requires emergency treatment. A small percentage of people who are stung by a bee or other insect quickly develop anaphylaxis. Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include: Skin reactions, including hives and itching and flushed or pale skin, Difficulty breathing, Swelling of the throat and tongue, A weak, rapid pulse, Nausea, vomiting or diarrhea, Dizziness or fainting, Loss of consciousness.
People who have a severe allergic reaction to a bee sting have a 25% to 65% chance of anaphylaxis the next time they're stung. Talk to your doctor or an allergy specialist about prevention measures such as immunotherapy ("allergy shots") to avoid a similar reaction in case you get stung again.
Generally, insects such as bees and wasps aren't aggressive and only sting in self-defense. In most cases, this results in one or perhaps a few stings. In some cases a person will disrupt a hive or swarm of bees and get multiple stings. Some types of bees — such as Africanized honeybees — are more likely than are other bees to swarm, stinging in a group.
If you get stung more than a dozen times, the accumulation of venom may induce a toxic reaction and make you feel quite sick. Signs and symptoms include: Nausea, vomiting or diarrhea, Headache, A feeling of spinning (vertigo), Convulsions, Fever, Dizziness or fainting.
Multiple stings can be a medical emergency in children, older adults, and people who have heart or breathing problems.
In most cases, bee stings don't require a visit to your doctor. In more-severe cases, you'll need immediate care.
Call 911 or other emergency services if you're having a serious reaction to a bee sting that suggests anaphylaxis, even if it's just one or two signs or symptoms. If you were prescribed an emergency epinephrine autoinjector (EpiPen, Auvi-Q, others), use it right away as your doctor directed.
Seek prompt medical care if you've been swarmed by bees and have multiple stings.
Make an appointment to see your doctor if: Bee sting symptoms don't go away within a few days, You've had other symptoms of an allergic response to a bee sting.
To sting, a bee jabs a barbed stinger into the skin. Bee sting venom contains proteins that affect skin cells and the immune system, causing pain and swelling around the sting area. In people with a bee sting allergy, bee venom can trigger a more-serious immune system reaction.
You're at increased risk of bee stings if: You live in an area where bees are especially active or with beehives nearby, Your work or hobbies require spending time outside.
You're more likely to have an allergic reaction to bee stings if you've had an allergic reaction to a bee sting in the past, even if it was minor.
Adults tend to have more-severe reactions than children do and are more likely to die of anaphylaxis than children are.
Behcet's disease symptoms vary from person to person, can come and go or become less severe over time. Signs and symptoms depend on which parts of your body are affected.
Areas commonly affected by Behcet's disease include:
Mouth. Painful mouth sores that look similar to canker sores are the most common sign of Behcet's disease. They begin as raised, round lesions in the mouth that quickly turn into painful ulcers. The sores usually heal in one to three weeks, though they do recur.
Skin. Some people develop acnelike sores on their bodies. Others develop red, raised and tender nodules on their skin, especially on the lower legs.
Genitals. Red, open sores can occur on the scrotum or the vulva. The sores are usually painful and can leave scars.
Eyes. Inflammation in the eye (uveitis) causes redness, pain and blurred vision, typically in both eyes. In people with Behcet's disease, the condition can come and go.
Joints. Joint swelling and pain often affect the knees in people with Behcet's disease. The ankles, elbows or wrists also might be involved. Signs and symptoms can last one to three weeks and go away on their own.
Blood vessels. Inflammation in veins and arteries can cause redness, pain, and swelling in the arms or legs when a blood clot results. Inflammation in the large arteries can lead to complications, such as aneurysms and narrowing or blockage of the vessel.
Digestive system. A variety of signs and symptoms can affect the digestive system, including abdominal pain, diarrhea and bleeding.
Brain. Inflammation in the brain and nervous system can cause headache, fever, disorientation, poor balance or stroke.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice unusual signs and symptoms that might indicate Behcet's disease. If you've been diagnosed with the condition, see your doctor if you notice new signs and symptoms.
Behcet's disease might be an autoimmune disorder, which means the body's immune system mistakenly attacks some of its own healthy cells. It's likely that genetic and environmental factors play a role.
The signs and symptoms of Behcet's disease are considered to be due to inflammation of the blood vessels (vasculitis). The condition can involve arteries and veins of all sizes, damaging them throughout the body.
Several genes have been found to be associated with the disease. Some researchers believe a virus or bacterium can trigger Behcet's disease in people who have certain genes that make them susceptible to Behcet's.
Factors that might increase your risk of Behcet's include:
Age. Behcet's disease commonly affects men and women in their 20s and 30s, though children and older adults also can develop the condition.
Where you live. People from countries in the Middle East and East Asia, including Turkey, Iran, Japan and China, are more likely to develop Behcet's.
Sex. While Behcet's disease occurs in both men and women, the disease is usually more severe in men.
Genes. Having certain genes is associated with a higher risk of developing Behcet's.
Complications of Behcet's disease depend on your signs and symptoms. For instance, untreated uveitis can lead to decreased vision or blindness. People with eye signs and symptoms of Behcet's disease need to visit an eye specialist (ophthalmologist) regularly because treatment can help prevent this complication.
Signs and symptoms of Bell's palsy come on suddenly and may include: Rapid onset of mild weakness to total paralysis on one side of your face — occurring within hours to days, Facial droop and difficulty making facial expressions, such as closing your eye or smiling, Drooling, Pain around the jaw or in or behind your ear on the affected side, Increased sensitivity to sound on the affected side, Headache, A loss of taste, Changes in the amount of tears and saliva you produce.
In rare cases, Bell's palsy can affect the nerves on both sides of your face.
Seek immediate medical help if you experience any type of paralysis because you may be having a stroke. Bell's palsy is not caused by a stroke, but it can cause similar symptoms.
See your doctor if you experience facial weakness or drooping to find out the underlying cause and severity of the illness.
Although the exact reason Bell's palsy occurs isn't clear, it's often related to having a viral infection. Viruses that have been linked to Bell's palsy include viruses that cause: Cold sores and genital herpes (herpes simplex), Chickenpox and shingles (herpes zoster), Infectious mononucleosis (Epstein-Barr), Cytomegalovirus infections, Respiratory illnesses (adenovirus), German measles (rubella), Mumps (mumps virus), Flu (influenza B), Hand-foot-and-mouth disease (coxsackievirus).
The nerve that controls your facial muscles passes through a narrow corridor of bone on its way to your face. In Bell's palsy, that nerve becomes inflamed and swollen — usually related to a viral infection. Besides facial muscles, the nerve affects tears, saliva, taste and a small bone in the middle of your ear.
Bell's palsy occurs more often in people who: Are pregnant, especially during the third trimester, or who are in the first week after giving birth, Have an upper respiratory infection, such as the flu or a cold, Have diabetes.
Recurrent attacks of Bell's palsy are rare. But in some of these cases, there's a family history of recurrent attacks — suggesting a possible genetic predisposition to Bell's palsy.
A mild case of Bell's palsy normally disappears within a month. Recovery from a more severe case involving total paralysis varies. Complications may include:
Irreversible damage to your facial nerve.
Abnormal regrowth of nerve fibers. This may result in involuntary contraction of certain muscles when you're trying to move others (synkinesis) — for example, when you smile, the eye on the affected side may close.
Partial or complete blindness of the eye that won't close due to excessive dryness and scratching of the clear protective covering of the eye (cornea).
The signs and symptoms of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) may include: Dizziness, A sense that you or your surroundings are spinning or moving (vertigo), A loss of balance or unsteadiness, Nausea, Vomiting.
The signs and symptoms of BPPV can come and go and commonly last less than one minute. Episodes of BPPV can disappear for some time and then recur.
Activities that bring about the signs and symptoms of BPPV can vary from person to person, but are almost always brought on by a change in head position. Some people also feel out of balance when standing or walking.
Abnormal rhythmic eye movements usually accompany the symptoms of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.
Generally, see your doctor if you experience any recurrent, sudden, severe, or prolonged and unexplained dizziness or vertigo.
Although it's uncommon for dizziness to signal a serious illness, see your doctor immediately if you experience dizziness or vertigo along with any of the following: A new, different or severe headache, A fever, Double vision or loss of vision, Hearing loss, Trouble speaking, Leg or arm weakness, Loss of consciousness, Falling or difficulty walking, Numbness or tingling.
The signs and symptoms listed above may signal a more serious problem.
Often, there's no known cause for BPPV. This is called idiopathic BPPV.
When there is a known cause, BPPV is often associated with a minor to severe blow to your head. Less common causes of BPPV include disorders that damage your inner ear or, rarely, damage that occurs during ear surgery or long periods positioned on your back, such as in a dentist chair. BPPV also has been associated with migraines.
Inside your ear is a tiny organ called the vestibular labyrinth. It includes three loop-shaped structures (semicircular canals) that contain fluid and fine, hairlike sensors that monitor your head's rotation.
Other structures (otolith organs) in your ear monitor your head's movements — up and down, right and left, back and forth — and your head's position related to gravity. These otolith organs contain crystals that make you sensitive to gravity.
For many reasons, these crystals can become dislodged. When they become dislodged, they can move into one of the semicircular canals — especially while you're lying down. This causes the semicircular canal to become sensitive to head position changes it would normally not respond to, which is what makes you feel dizzy.
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo occurs most often in people age 50 and older, but can occur at any age. BPPV is also more common in women than in men. A head injury or any other disorder of the balance organs of your ear may make you more susceptible to BPPV.
Although BPPV is uncomfortable, it rarely causes complications. The dizziness of BPPV can make you unsteady, which may put you at greater risk of falling.
The severity of symptoms in people who have prostate gland enlargement varies, but symptoms tend to gradually worsen over time. Common signs and symptoms of BPH include: Frequent or urgent need to urinate, Increased frequency of urination at night (nocturia), Difficulty starting urination, Weak urine stream or a stream that stops and starts, Dribbling at the end of urination, Inability to completely empty the bladder.
Less common signs and symptoms include: Urinary tract infection, Inability to urinate, Blood in the urine.
The size of your prostate doesn't necessarily determine the severity of your symptoms. Some men with only slightly enlarged prostates can have significant symptoms, while other men with very enlarged prostates can have only minor urinary symptoms.
In some men, symptoms eventually stabilize and might even improve over time.
Conditions that can lead to symptoms similar to those caused by enlarged prostate include: Urinary tract infection, Inflammation of the prostate (prostatitis), Narrowing of the urethra (urethral stricture), Scarring in the bladder neck as a result of previous surgery, Bladder or kidney stones, Problems with nerves that control the bladder, Cancer of the prostate or bladder.
If you're having urinary problems, discuss them with your doctor. Even if you don't find urinary symptoms bothersome, it's important to identify or rule out any underlying causes. Untreated, urinary problems might lead to obstruction of the urinary tract.
If you're unable to pass any urine, seek immediate medical attention.
The prostate gland is located beneath your bladder. The tube that transports urine from the bladder out of your penis (urethra) passes through the center of the prostate. When the prostate enlarges, it begins to block urine flow.
Most men have continued prostate growth throughout life. In many men, this continued growth enlarges the prostate enough to cause urinary symptoms or to significantly block urine flow.
It isn't entirely clear what causes the prostate to enlarge. However, it might be due to changes in the balance of sex hormones as men grow older.
Risk factors for prostate gland enlargement include:
Aging. Prostate gland enlargement rarely causes signs and symptoms in men younger than age 40. About one-third of men experience moderate to severe symptoms by age 60, and about half do so by age 80.
Family history. Having a blood relative, such as a father or a brother, with prostate problems means you're more likely to have problems.
Diabetes and heart disease. Studies show that diabetes, as well as heart disease and use of beta blockers, might increase the risk of BPH.
Lifestyle. Obesity increases the risk of BPH, while exercise can lower your risk.
Complications of an enlarged prostate can include:
Sudden inability to urinate (urinary retention). You might need to have a tube (catheter) inserted into your bladder to drain the urine. Some men with an enlarged prostate need surgery to relieve urinary retention.
Urinary tract infections (UTIs). Inability to fully empty the bladder can increase the risk of infection in your urinary tract. If UTIs occur frequently, you might need surgery to remove part of the prostate.
Bladder stones. These are generally caused by an inability to completely empty the bladder. Bladder stones can cause infection, bladder irritation, blood in the urine and obstruction of urine flow.
Bladder damage. A bladder that hasn't emptied completely can stretch and weaken over time. As a result, the muscular wall of the bladder no longer contracts properly, making it harder to fully empty your bladder.
Kidney damage. Pressure in the bladder from urinary retention can directly damage the kidneys or allow bladder infections to reach the kidneys.
Most men with an enlarged prostate don't develop these complications. However, acute urinary retention and kidney damage can be serious health threats.
Having an enlarged prostate is not believed to increase your risk of developing prostate cancer.
Bile reflux can be difficult to distinguish from gastric acid reflux. The signs and symptoms are similar, and the two conditions may occur at the same time.
Bile reflux signs and symptoms include: Upper abdominal pain that may be severe, Frequent heartburn — a burning sensation in your chest that sometimes spreads to your throat, along with a sour taste in your mouth, Nausea, Vomiting a greenish-yellow fluid (bile), Occasionally, a cough or hoarseness, Unintended weight loss.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you frequently experience symptoms of reflux, or if you're losing weight without trying.
If you've been diagnosed with GERD but aren't getting enough relief from your medications, call your doctor. You may need additional treatment for bile reflux.
Bile is essential for digesting fats and for eliminating worn-out red blood cells and certain toxins from your body. Bile is produced in your liver and stored in your gallbladder.
Eating a meal that contains even a small amount of fat signals your gallbladder to release bile, which flows through a small tube into the upper part of your small intestine (duodenum).
Bile and food mix in the duodenum and enter your small intestine. The pyloric valve, a heavy ring of muscle located at the outlet of your stomach, usually opens only slightly — enough to release about an eighth of an ounce (about 3.75 milliliters) or less of liquefied food at a time, but not enough to allow digestive juices to reflux into the stomach.
In cases of bile reflux, the valve doesn't close properly, and bile washes back into the stomach. This can lead to inflammation of the stomach lining (bile reflux gastritis).
Bile and stomach acid can reflux into the esophagus when another muscular valve, the lower esophageal sphincter, doesn't work properly. The lower esophageal sphincter separates the esophagus and stomach. The valve normally opens just long enough to allow food to pass into the stomach. But if the valve weakens or relaxes abnormally, bile can wash back into the esophagus.
Bile reflux may be caused by:
Surgery complications. Stomach surgery, including total or partial removal of the stomach and gastric bypass surgery for weight loss, is responsible for most bile reflux.
Peptic ulcers. A peptic ulcer can block the pyloric valve so that it doesn't open or close properly. Stagnant food in the stomach can lead to increased gastric pressure and allow bile and stomach acid to back up into the esophagus.
Gallbladder surgery. People who have had their gallbladders removed have significantly more bile reflux than do people who haven't had this surgery.
Bile reflux gastritis has been linked to stomach cancer. The combination of bile reflux and acid reflux also increases the risk of the following complications:
GERD. This condition, which causes irritation and inflammation of the esophagus, is most often due to excess acid, but bile may be mixed with the acid.
Bile is often suspected of contributing to GERD when people respond incompletely or not at all to powerful acid-suppressant medications.
Barrett's esophagus. This serious condition can occur when long-term exposure to stomach acid, or to acid and bile, damages tissue in the lower esophagus. The damaged esophageal cells have an increased risk of becoming cancerous. Animal studies have also linked bile reflux to Barrett's esophagus.
Esophageal cancer. There's a link between acid reflux and bile reflux and esophageal cancer, which may not be diagnosed until it's quite advanced. In animal studies, bile reflux alone has been shown to cause cancer of the esophagus.
Most people with binge-eating disorder are overweight or obese, but you may be at a normal weight. Behavioral and emotional signs and symptoms of binge-eating disorder include: Eating unusually large amounts of food in a specific amount of time, such as over a two-hour period, Feeling that your eating behavior is out of control, Eating even when you're full or not hungry, Eating rapidly during binge episodes, Eating until you're uncomfortably full, Frequently eating alone or in secret, Feeling depressed, disgusted, ashamed, guilty or upset about your eating, Frequently dieting, possibly without weight loss.
Unlike a person with bulimia, after a binge, you don't regularly compensate for extra calories eaten by vomiting, using laxatives or exercising excessively. You may try to diet or eat normal meals. But restricting your diet may simply lead to more binge eating.
The severity of binge-eating disorder is determined by how often episodes of bingeing occur during a week.
If you have any symptoms of binge-eating disorder, seek medical help as soon as possible. Binge-eating problems can vary in their course from short-lived to recurrent or they may persist for years if left untreated.
Talk to your medical care provider or a mental health professional about your binge-eating symptoms and feelings. If you're reluctant to seek treatment, talk to someone you trust about what you're going through. A friend, loved one, teacher or faith leader can help you take the first steps to successful treatment of binge-eating disorder.
A person with binge-eating disorder may become an expert at hiding behavior, making it hard for others to detect the problem. If you have a loved one you think may have symptoms of binge-eating disorder, have an open and honest discussion about your concerns.
Provide encouragement and support. Offer to help your loved one find a qualified medical care provider or mental health professional and make an appointment. You might even offer to go along.
The causes of binge-eating disorder are unknown. But genetics, biological factors, long-term dieting and psychological issues increase your risk.
Binge-eating disorder is more common in women than in men. Although people of any age can have binge-eating disorder, it often begins in the late teens or early 20s.
Factors that can increase your risk of developing binge-eating disorder include:
Family history. You're much more likely to have an eating disorder if your parents or siblings have (or had) an eating disorder. This may indicate that inherited genes increase the risk of developing an eating disorder.
Dieting. Many people with binge-eating disorder have a history of dieting. Dieting or restricting calories during the day may trigger an urge to binge eat, especially if you have symptoms of depression.
Psychological issues. Many people who have binge-eating disorder feel negatively about themselves and their skills and accomplishments. Triggers for bingeing can include stress, poor body self-image and the availability of preferred binge foods.
You may develop psychological and physical problems related to binge eating.
Complications that may be caused by binge-eating disorder include: Poor quality of life, Problems functioning at work, with your personal life or in social situations, Social isolation, Obesity, Medical conditions related to obesity, such as joint problems, heart disease, type 2 diabetes, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and some sleep-related breathing disorders.
Psychiatric disorders that are often linked with binge-eating disorder include: Depression, Bipolar disorder, Anxiety, Substance use disorders.
There are several types of bipolar and related disorders. They may include mania or hypomania and depression. Symptoms can cause unpredictable changes in mood and behavior, resulting in significant distress and difficulty in life.
Bipolar I disorder. You've had at least one manic episode that may be preceded or followed by hypomanic or major depressive episodes. In some cases, mania may trigger a break from reality (psychosis).
Bipolar II disorder. You've had at least one major depressive episode and at least one hypomanic episode, but you've never had a manic episode.
Cyclothymic disorder. You've had at least two years — or one year in children and teenagers — of many periods of hypomania symptoms and periods of depressive symptoms (though less severe than major depression).
Other types. These include, for example, bipolar and related disorders induced by certain drugs or alcohol or due to a medical condition, such as Cushing's disease, multiple sclerosis or stroke.
Bipolar II disorder is not a milder form of bipolar I disorder, but a separate diagnosis. While the manic episodes of bipolar I disorder can be severe and dangerous, individuals with bipolar II disorder can be depressed for longer periods, which can cause significant impairment.
Although bipolar disorder can occur at any age, typically it's diagnosed in the teenage years or early 20s. Symptoms can vary from person to person, and symptoms may vary over time.
Mania and hypomania are two distinct types of episodes, but they have the same symptoms. Mania is more severe than hypomania and causes more noticeable problems at work, school and social activities, as well as relationship difficulties. Mania may also trigger a break from reality (psychosis) and require hospitalization.
Both a manic and a hypomanic episode include three or more of these symptoms: Abnormally upbeat, jumpy or wired, Increased activity, energy or agitation, Exaggerated sense of well-being and self-confidence (euphoria), Decreased need for sleep, Unusual talkativeness, Racing thoughts, Distractibility, Poor decision-making — for example, going on buying sprees, taking sexual risks or making foolish investments.
A major depressive episode includes symptoms that are severe enough to cause noticeable difficulty in day-to-day activities, such as work, school, social activities or relationships. An episode includes five or more of these symptoms: Depressed mood, such as feeling sad, empty, hopeless or tearful (in children and teens, depressed mood can appear as irritability), Marked loss of interest or feeling no pleasure in all — or almost all — activities, Significant weight loss when not dieting, weight gain, or decrease or increase in appetite (in children, failure to gain weight as expected can be a sign of depression), Either insomnia or sleeping too much, Either restlessness or slowed behavior, Fatigue or loss of energy, Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt, Decreased ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, Thinking about, planning or attempting suicide.
Signs and symptoms of bipolar I and bipolar II disorders may include other features, such as anxious distress, melancholy, psychosis or others. The timing of symptoms may include diagnostic labels such as mixed or rapid cycling. In addition, bipolar symptoms may occur during pregnancy or change with the seasons.
Symptoms of bipolar disorder can be difficult to identify in children and teens. It's often hard to tell whether these are normal ups and downs, the results of stress or trauma, or signs of a mental health problem other than bipolar disorder.
Children and teens may have distinct major depressive or manic or hypomanic episodes, but the pattern can vary from that of adults with bipolar disorder. And moods can rapidly shift during episodes. Some children may have periods without mood symptoms between episodes.
The most prominent signs of bipolar disorder in children and teenagers may include severe mood swings that are different from their usual mood swings.
Despite the mood extremes, people with bipolar disorder often don't recognize how much their emotional instability disrupts their lives and the lives of their loved ones and don't get the treatment they need.
And if you're like some people with bipolar disorder, you may enjoy the feelings of euphoria and cycles of being more productive. However, this euphoria is always followed by an emotional crash that can leave you depressed, worn out — and perhaps in financial, legal or relationship trouble.
If you have any symptoms of depression or mania, see your doctor or mental health professional. Bipolar disorder doesn't get better on its own. Getting treatment from a mental health professional with experience in bipolar disorder can help you get your symptoms under control.
Suicidal thoughts and behavior are common among people with bipolar disorder. If you have thoughts of hurting yourself, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately, go to an emergency room, or confide in a trusted relative or friend. Or call a suicide hotline number — in the United States, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255).
If you have a loved one who is in danger of suicide or has made a suicide attempt, make sure someone stays with that person. Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately. Or, if you think you can do so safely, take the person to the nearest hospital emergency room.
The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown, but several factors may be involved, such as:
Biological differences. People with bipolar disorder appear to have physical changes in their brains. The significance of these changes is still uncertain but may eventually help pinpoint causes.
Genetics. Bipolar disorder is more common in people who have a first-degree relative, such as a sibling or parent, with the condition. Researchers are trying to find genes that may be involved in causing bipolar disorder.
Factors that may increase the risk of developing bipolar disorder or act as a trigger for the first episode include: Having a first-degree relative, such as a parent or sibling, with bipolar disorder, Periods of high stress, such as the death of a loved one or other traumatic event, Drug or alcohol abuse.
Left untreated, bipolar disorder can result in serious problems that affect every area of your life, such as: Problems related to drug and alcohol use, Suicide or suicide attempts, Legal or financial problems, Damaged relationships, Poor work or school performance.
If you have bipolar disorder, you may also have another health condition that needs to be treated along with bipolar disorder. Some conditions can worsen bipolar disorder symptoms or make treatment less successful. Examples include: Anxiety disorders, Eating disorders, Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), Alcohol or drug problems, Physical health problems, such as heart disease, thyroid problems, headaches or obesity.
Signs and symptoms of bird flu may begin within two to seven days of infection, depending on the type. In most cases, they resemble those of conventional influenza, including: Cough, Fever, Sore throat, Muscle aches, Headache, Shortness of breath.
Some people also experience nausea, vomiting or diarrhea. And in a few cases, a mild eye infection (conjunctivitis) is the only indication of the disease.
See your doctor immediately if you develop a fever, cough and body aches and have recently traveled to a part of the world where bird flu occurs. Be sure to let your doctor know if you visited any farms or open-air markets.
Bird flu occurs naturally in wild waterfowl and can spread into domestic poultry, such as chickens, turkeys, ducks and geese. The disease is transmitted via contact with an infected bird's feces, or secretions from its nose, mouth or eyes.
Open-air markets, where eggs and birds are sold in crowded and unsanitary conditions, are hotbeds of infection and can spread the disease into the wider community.
Undercooked poultry meat or eggs from infected birds can transmit bird flu. Poultry meat is safe to eat if it's been cooked to an internal temperature of 165 F (74 C). Eggs should be cooked until the yolks and whites are firm.
The greatest risk factor for bird flu seems to be contact with sick birds or with surfaces contaminated by their feathers, saliva or droppings.  The pattern of human transmission remains mysterious.  In very few instances, bird flu has been transmitted from one human to another. But unless the virus begins to spread more easily among people, infected birds present the greatest hazard.
People with bird flu may develop life-threatening complications, including: Pneumonia, Pink eye (conjunctivitis), Respiratory failure, Kidney dysfunction, Heart problems.
Although bird flu may kill more than half the people it infects, the number of fatalities is still low because so few people have had bird flu. Fewer than 500 bird flu deaths have been reported to the World Health Organization since 1997.
In contrast, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that seasonal influenza is responsible for thousands of deaths each year in the United States alone.
Signs and symptoms of black hairy tongue include: Black discoloration of the tongue, although the color may be brown, tan, green, yellow or white, A hairy or furry appearance of the tongue, Altered taste or metallic taste in your mouth, Bad breath (halitosis), Gagging or tickling sensation, if the overgrowth of the papillae is excessive.
Though unattractive, black hairy tongue is usually a temporary, harmless condition.
See your doctor if: You're concerned about the appearance of your tongue, Black hairy tongue persists despite brushing your teeth and tongue twice daily.
Black hairy tongue typically results when projections on the tongue called papillae grow longer because they don't shed dead skin cells like normal. This makes the tongue look hairy. Debris, bacteria or other organisms can collect on the papillae and result in discoloration.
Although the cause of black hairy tongue can't always be determined, possible causes or contributing factors include: Changes in the normal bacteria or yeast content of the mouth after antibiotic use, Poor oral hygiene, Dry mouth (xerostomia), Regular use of mouthwashes containing irritating oxidizing agents, such as peroxide, Tobacco use, Drinking excessive amounts of coffee or black tea, Excessive alcohol use, Eating a soft diet that doesn't help to rub dead skin cells from your tongue.
Bladder cancer signs and symptoms may include: Blood in urine (hematuria), which may cause urine to appear bright red or cola colored, though sometimes the urine appears normal and blood is detected on a lab test, Frequent urination, Painful urination, Back pain.
If you notice that you have discolored urine and are concerned it may contain blood, make an appointment with your doctor to get it checked. Also make an appointment with your doctor if you have other signs or symptoms that worry you.
Bladder cancer begins when cells in the bladder develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the cell to multiply rapidly and to go on living when healthy cells would die. The abnormal cells form a tumor that can invade and destroy normal body tissue. In time, the abnormal cells can break away and spread (metastasize) through the body.
Different types of cells in your bladder can become cancerous. The type of bladder cell where cancer begins determines the type of bladder cancer. Doctors use this information to determine which treatments may work best for you.
Types of bladder cancer include:
Urothelial carcinoma. Urothelial carcinoma, previously called transitional cell carcinoma, occurs in the cells that line the inside of the bladder. Urothelial cells expand when your bladder is full and contract when your bladder is empty. These same cells line the inside of the ureters and the urethra, and cancers can form in those places as well. Urothelial carcinoma is the most common type of bladder cancer in the United States.
Squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cell carcinoma is associated with chronic irritation of the bladder — for instance, from an infection or from long-term use of a urinary catheter. Squamous cell bladder cancer is rare in the United States. It's more common in parts of the world where a certain parasitic infection (schistosomiasis) is a common cause of bladder infections.
Adenocarcinoma. Adenocarcinoma begins in cells that make up mucus-secreting glands in the bladder. Adenocarcinoma of the bladder is very rare.
Some bladder cancers include more than one type of cell.
Factors that may increase bladder cancer risk include:
Smoking. Smoking cigarettes, cigars or pipes may increase the risk of bladder cancer by causing harmful chemicals to accumulate in the urine. When you smoke, your body processes the chemicals in the smoke and excretes some of them in your urine. These harmful chemicals may damage the lining of your bladder, which can increase your risk of cancer.
Increasing age. Bladder cancer risk increases as you age. Though it can occur at any age, most people diagnosed with bladder cancer are older than 55.
Being male. Men are more likely to develop bladder cancer than women are.
Exposure to certain chemicals. Your kidneys play a key role in filtering harmful chemicals from your bloodstream and moving them into your bladder. Because of this, it's thought that being around certain chemicals may increase the risk of bladder cancer. Chemicals linked to bladder cancer risk include arsenic and chemicals used in the manufacture of dyes, rubber, leather, textiles and paint products.
Previous cancer treatment. Treatment with the anti-cancer drug cyclophosphamide increases the risk of bladder cancer. People who received radiation treatments aimed at the pelvis for a previous cancer have a higher risk of developing bladder cancer.
Chronic bladder inflammation. Chronic or repeated urinary infections or inflammations (cystitis), such as might happen with long-term use of a urinary catheter, may increase the risk of a squamous cell bladder cancer. In some areas of the world, squamous cell carcinoma is linked to chronic bladder inflammation caused by the parasitic infection known as schistosomiasis.
Personal or family history of cancer. If you've had bladder cancer, you're more likely to get it again. If one of your blood relatives — a parent, sibling or child — has a history of bladder cancer, you may have an increased risk of the disease, although it's rare for bladder cancer to run in families. A family history of Lynch syndrome, also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), can increase the risk of cancer in the urinary system, as well as in the colon, uterus, ovaries and other organs.
Bladder exstrophy is the most common in the larger group of birth defects called the bladder exstrophy-epispadias complex (BEEC). If your child has BEEC, he or she will have one of the following:
Epispadias. This is the least severe form of BEEC, in which the tube to expel urine (urethra) doesn't fully develop.
Bladder exstrophy. This defect causes the bladder to form on the outside of the body. The bladder is also turned inside out. Usually, bladder exstrophy will involve organs of the urinary tract, as well as the digestive and reproductive systems. Defects of the abdominal wall, bladder, genitals, pelvic bones, final section of the large intestine (rectum) and opening at the end of the rectum (anus) can occur.
Children with bladder exstrophy also have vesicoureteral reflux. This condition causes urine to flow the wrong way — from the bladder back up into the tubes that connect to the kidneys (ureters). Children with bladder exstrophy also have epispadias.
Cloacal exstrophy. Cloacal exstrophy (kloe-A-kul EK-stroh-fee) is the most serious form of BEEC. In this condition, the rectum, bladder and genitals don't fully separate as the fetus develops. These organs may not be correctly formed, and the pelvic bones are affected as well.
The kidneys, backbone and spinal cord also may be affected. Most children with cloacal exstrophy have spinal abnormalities, including spina bifida. Children born with protruding abdominal organs probably also have cloacal exstrophy or bladder exstrophy.
Doctors aren't sure what causes bladder exstrophy to develop. Researchers think that a combination of genetic and environmental factors likely plays a role.
What is known is that as the fetus grows, a structure called the cloaca (klo-A-kuh) — where reproductive, urinary and digestive openings all come together — doesn't develop properly in babies who develop bladder exstrophy. Defects in the cloaca can vary a lot depending on the age of the fetus when the developmental error occurs.
Factors that increase the risk of bladder exstrophy include:
Family history. Firstborn children, children of a parent with bladder exstrophy or siblings of a child with bladder exstrophy have an increased chance of being born with the condition.
Race. Bladder exstrophy is more common in whites than in other races.
Sex. More boys than girls are born with bladder exstrophy.
Use of assisted reproduction. Children born through assisted reproductive technology, such as IVF, have a higher risk of bladder exstrophy.
Without treatment, children with bladder exstrophy won't be able to hold urine (urinary incontinence). They're also at risk of sexual dysfunction and have an increased risk of bladder cancer.
Surgery can reduce complications. The success of surgery depends on how severe the defect is. Many children who have surgical repair are able to hold urine. Young children with bladder exstrophy may walk with their legs turned somewhat outward due to the separation of their pelvic bones.
People born with bladder exstrophy can go on to have normal sexual function, including the ability to have children. However, pregnancy will be high risk for both mother and baby, and a planned cesarean birth may be needed.
Sometimes bladder stones — even large ones — cause no problems. But if a stone irritates the bladder wall or blocks the flow of urine, signs and symptoms may include: Lower abdominal pain, Pain during urination, Frequent urination, Difficulty urinating or interrupted urine flow, Blood in the urine, Cloudy or abnormally dark-colored urine.
Bladder stones can develop when your bladder doesn't empty completely. This causes urine to become concentrated urine, and then it may crystallize and form stones.
Some infections can lead to bladder stones, and sometimes an underlying condition that affects the bladder's ability to hold, store or eliminate urine can result in bladder stone formation. Any foreign materials present in the bladder tend to cause bladder stones.
The most common conditions that cause bladder stones include:
Prostate gland enlargement. An enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH) can cause bladder stones in men. An enlarged prostate can obstruct the flow of urine, preventing the bladder from emptying completely.
Damaged nerves. Normally, nerves carry messages from your brain to your bladder muscles, directing your bladder muscles to tighten or release. If these nerves are damaged — from a stroke, spinal cord injury or other health problem — your bladder may not empty completely. This is known as neurogenic bladder.
Other possible causes of bladder stones include:
Inflammation. Bladder inflammation, sometimes caused by urinary tract infections or radiation therapy to the pelvis, can lead to bladder stones.
Medical devices. Bladder catheters — slender tubes inserted through the urethra to help urine drain from your bladder — may cause bladder stones. So can objects that accidentally migrate to your bladder, such as a contraceptive device or urinary stent. Mineral crystals, which later become stones, tend to form on the surfaces of these devices.
Kidney stones. Stones that form in your kidneys are not the same as bladder stones. They develop in different ways. But small kidney stones may travel down the ureters into your bladder and, if not expelled, can grow into bladder stones.
Men, especially those over 50, are more likely to have bladder stones.
Conditions that can raise the risk of bladder stones include:
An obstruction. Any condition that blocks the flow of urine from your bladder to the urethra — the tube that carries urine out of your body — can lead to bladder stone formation. There are a number of causes, but the most common is an enlarged prostate.
Nerve damage. Stroke, spinal cord injuries, Parkinson's disease, diabetes, a herniated disk and a number of other problems can damage nerves that control bladder function.
It's possible to have nerve damage and a condition that causes bladder outlet obstruction. Having these together further increases the risk of stones.
Bladder stones that don't pass — even those that don't cause symptoms — can lead to complications, such as:
Chronic bladder problems. Untreated bladder stones can cause long-term urinary difficulties, such as pain or frequent urination. Bladder stones can also lodge in the opening where urine exits the bladder into the urethra and block the flow of urine.
Urinary tract infections. Repeated bacterial infections in your urinary tract may be caused by bladder stones.
Signs and symptoms possibly associated with Blastocystis hominis include: Watery diarrhea, Nausea, Abdominal pain, Bloating, Excessive gas (flatulence), Loss of appetite, Fatigue.
See your doctor if you have signs and symptoms, such as diarrhea or cramps, that last longer than three days.
Blastocystis is a parasite — a microscopic single-celled organism (protozoan). Many protozoans normally live in your gastrointestinal tract and are harmless or even helpful; others cause disease.
It's not clear whether blastocystis causes disease. Most people who carry the organism have no signs or symptoms, but it's also found in people who have diarrhea and other digestive problems. Blastocystis often appears with other organisms, so it's not known whether it causes disease.
Experts suspect that blastocystis gets into the digestive system when people eat contaminated food or are exposed to the stool of a contaminated person, such as when changing a diaper in a child care setting. Rates of the organism in stool increase where there's inadequate sanitation and poor personal hygiene.
Blastocystis hominis is common, and anyone can have the organism in his or her stools. You might be at higher risk if you travel or live where sanitation is inadequate or where the water might not be safe or if you handle contaminated animals, such as pigs and poultry.
If you have diarrhea associated with Blastocystis hominis, it's likely to be self-limiting. However, anytime you have diarrhea, you lose vital fluids, salts and minerals, which can lead to dehydration. Children are especially vulnerable to dehydration.
Blepharitis signs and symptoms are typically worse in the morning. They include: Watery eyes, Red eyes, A gritty, burning or stinging sensation in the eyes, Eyelids that appear greasy, Itchy eyelids, Red, swollen eyelids, Flaking of the skin around the eyes, Crusted eyelashes, Eyelid sticking, More frequent blinking, Sensitivity to light, Blurred vision that usually improves with blinking.
If you have blepharitis signs and symptoms that don't seem to improve despite good hygiene — regular cleaning and care of the affected area — make an appointment with your doctor.
The exact cause of blepharitis isn't clear. In some cases, it can spread to another person. It might be associated with one or more of the following: Seborrheic dermatitis — dandruff of the scalp and eyebrows, Infection, Clogged or malfunctioning oil glands in your eyelids, Rosacea — a skin condition characterized by facial redness, Allergies, including allergic reactions to eye medications, contact lens solutions or eye makeup, Eyelash mites or lice, Dry eyes.
If you have blepharitis, you might also have:
Eyelash problems. Blepharitis can cause your eyelashes to fall out, grow abnormally (misdirected eyelashes) or lose color.
Eyelid skin problems. Scarring can develop on your eyelids from long-term blepharitis. Or the eyelid edges might turn inward or outward.
Excess tearing or dry eyes. Abnormal oily secretions and other debris shed from the eyelids, such as flaking associated with dandruff, can build up in your tear film — the water, oil and mucus solution that forms tears.
Abnormal tear film interferes with keeping your eyelids moist. This can irritate your eyes and cause symptoms of dry eyes or excess tearing.
Sty. A sty is an infection that develops near the base of the eyelashes. The result is a painful lump on the edge of your eyelid. A sty is usually most visible on the surface of the eyelid.
Chalazion. A chalazion occurs when there's a blockage in one of the small oil glands at the margin of the eyelid, just behind the eyelashes. This blockage causes inflammation of the gland, which makes the eyelid swell and redden. This can clear up or turn into a hard, nontender bump.
Chronic pink eye. Blepharitis can lead to recurrent bouts of pink eye (conjunctivitis).
Injury to the cornea. Constant irritation from inflamed eyelids or misdirected eyelashes can cause a sore to develop on your cornea. Not having enough tears could increase your risk of a corneal infection.
Signs and symptoms of a blocked tear duct include: Excessive tearing, Redness of the white part of the eye, Recurrent eye infection or inflammation (pink eye), Painful swelling near the inside corner of the eye, Crusting of the eyelids, Mucus or pus discharge from the lids and surface of the eye, Blurred vision.
See your doctor if you tear constantly for several days or if your eye is repeatedly or continually infected. A blocked tear duct may be caused by a tumor pressing on the tear drainage system. Early identification of the tumor can give you more treatment options.
Blocked tear ducts can happen at any age. They may even be present at birth (congenital). Causes include:
Congenital blockage. Many infants are born with a blocked tear duct. The tear drainage system may not be fully developed or there may be a duct abnormality. Often a thin tissue membrane remains over the opening that empties into the nose (nasolacrimal duct).
Age-related changes. As you age, the tiny openings that drain tears (puncta) may get narrower, causing blockage.
Infection or inflammation. Chronic infection or inflammation of your eyes, tear drainage system or nose can cause your tear ducts to become blocked.
Injury or trauma. An injury to your face can cause bone damage or scarring near the drainage system, disrupting the normal flow of tears through the ducts. Even small particles of dirt or loose skin cells lodged in the duct can cause blockage.
Tumor. A tumor in the nose or anywhere along the tear drainage system can cause blockage.
Inflammatory conditions. Disorders that cause swelling, such as sarcoidosis or granulomatosis with polyangiitis, can increase the risk of developing a blocked tear duct.
Eyedrops. Rarely, long-term use of certain medications, such as eyedrops used to treat glaucoma, can cause a blocked tear duct.
Cancer treatments. A blocked tear duct is a possible side effect of chemotherapy medication and radiation treatment for cancer.
The lacrimal glands produce most of your tears. These glands are located inside the upper lids above each eye. Normally, tears flow from the lacrimal glands over the surface of your eye. Tears drain into the puncta, located in the inside corners of your upper and lower eyelids.
Your eyelids have small canals (canaliculi) that move tears to a sac where the lids are attached to the side of the nose (lacrimal sac). From there tears travel down a duct (the nasolacrimal duct) draining into your nose. Once in the nose, tears are reabsorbed.
A blockage can occur at any point in the tear drainage system, from the puncta to your nose. When that happens, your tears don't drain properly, giving you watery eyes and increasing your risk of eye infections and inflammation.
Certain factors increase your risk of developing a blocked tear duct:
Age and sex. Older women are at highest risk of developing blocked tear ducts due to age-related changes.
Chronic eye inflammation. If your eyes are continually irritated, red and inflamed (conjunctivitis), you're at higher risk of developing a blocked tear duct.
Previous surgery. Previous eye, eyelid, nasal or sinus surgery may have caused some scarring of the duct system, possibly resulting in a blocked tear duct later.
Glaucoma. Anti-glaucoma medications are often used topically on the eye. If you've used these or other topical eye medications, you're at higher risk of developing a blocked tear duct.
Previous cancer treatment. If you've had radiation or chemotherapy to treat cancer, particularly if the radiation was focused on your face or head, you're at higher risk of developing a blocked tear duct.
Because your tears aren't draining the way they should, the tears that remain in the drainage system become stagnant. This promotes growth of bacteria, viruses and fungi, which can lead to recurrent eye infections and inflammation.
Any part of the tear drainage system, including the clear membrane over your eye surface (conjunctiva), can become infected or inflamed because of a blocked tear duct.
Gross hematuria produces pink, red or cola-colored urine due to the presence of red blood cells. It takes little blood to produce red urine, and the bleeding usually isn't painful. Passing blood clots in your urine, however, can be painful.
Bloody urine often occurs without other signs or symptoms.
Make an appointment to see your doctor anytime you notice blood in your urine.
Some medications, such as the laxative Ex-lax, and certain foods, including beets, rhubarb and berries, can cause your urine to turn red. A change in urine color caused by drugs, food or exercise might go away within a few days.
Bloody urine looks different, but you might not be able to tell the difference. It's best to see your doctor anytime you see red-colored urine.
In hematuria, your kidneys — or other parts of your urinary tract — allow blood cells to leak into urine. Various problems can cause this leakage, including:
Urinary tract infections. These occur when bacteria enter your body through the urethra and multiply in your bladder. Symptoms can include a persistent urge to urinate, pain and burning with urination, and extremely strong-smelling urine.
For some people, especially older adults, the only sign of illness might be microscopic blood in the urine.
Kidney infections (pyelonephritis). These can occur when bacteria enter your kidneys from your bloodstream or move from your ureters to your kidney(s). Signs and symptoms are often similar to bladder infections, though kidney infections are more likely to cause a fever and flank pain.
A bladder or kidney stone. The minerals in concentrated urine sometimes form crystals on the walls of your kidneys or bladder. Over time, the crystals can become small, hard stones.
The stones are generally painless, so you probably won't know you have them unless they cause a blockage or are being passed. Then there's usually no mistaking the symptoms — kidney stones, especially, can cause excruciating pain. Bladder or kidney stones can also cause both gross and microscopic bleeding.
Enlarged prostate. The prostate gland — which is just below the bladder and surrounding the top part of the urethra — often enlarges as men approach middle age. It then compresses the urethra, partially blocking urine flow. Signs and symptoms of an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH) include difficulty urinating, an urgent or persistent need to urinate, and either visible or microscopic blood in the urine. Infection of the prostate (prostatitis) can cause the same signs and symptoms.
Kidney disease. Microscopic urinary bleeding is a common symptom of glomerulonephritis, an inflammation of the kidneys' filtering system. Glomerulonephritis may be part of a systemic disease, such as diabetes, or it can occur on its own. Viral or strep infections, blood vessel diseases (vasculitis), and immune problems such as IgA nephropathy, which affects the small capillaries that filter blood in the kidneys (glomeruli), can trigger glomerulonephritis.
Cancer. Visible urinary bleeding may be a sign of advanced kidney, bladder or prostate cancer. Unfortunately, you might not have signs or symptoms in the early stages, when these cancers are more treatable.
Inherited disorders. Sickle cell anemia — a hereditary defect of hemoglobin in red blood cells — causes blood in urine, both visible and microscopic hematuria. So can Alport syndrome, which affects the filtering membranes in the glomeruli of the kidneys.
Kidney injury. A blow or other injury to your kidneys from an accident or contact sports can cause visible blood in your urine.
Medications. The anti-cancer drug cyclophosphamide and penicillin can cause urinary bleeding. Visible urinary blood sometimes occurs if you take an anticoagulant, such as aspirin and the blood thinner heparin, and you also have a condition that causes your bladder to bleed.
Strenuous exercise. It's rare for strenuous exercise to lead to gross hematuria, and the cause is unknown.  It may be linked to trauma to the bladder, dehydration or the breakdown of red blood cells that occurs with sustained aerobic exercise.
Runners are most often affected, although anyone can develop visible urinary bleeding after an intense workout. If you see blood in your urine after exercise, don't assume it's from exercising. See your doctor.
Often the cause of hematuria can't be identified.
Almost anyone — including children and teens — can have red blood cells in the urine. Factors that make this more likely include:
Age. Many men older than 50 have occasional hematuria due to an enlarged prostate gland.
A recent infection. Kidney inflammation after a viral or bacterial infection (post-infectious glomerulonephritis) is one of the leading causes of visible urinary blood in children.
Family history. You might be more prone to urinary bleeding if you have a family history of kidney disease or kidney stones.
Certain medications. Aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory pain relievers and antibiotics such as penicillin are known to increase the risk of urinary bleeding.
Strenuous exercise. Long-distance runners are especially prone to exercise-induced urinary bleeding. In fact, the condition is sometimes called jogger's hematuria. But anyone who works out strenuously can develop symptoms.
Signs and symptoms of body dysmorphic disorder include: Being extremely preoccupied with a perceived flaw in appearance that to others can't be seen or appears minor, Strong belief that you have a defect in your appearance that makes you ugly or deformed, Belief that others take special notice of your appearance in a negative way or mock you, Engaging in behaviors aimed at fixing or hiding the perceived flaw that are difficult to resist or control, such as frequently checking the mirror, grooming or skin picking, Attempting to hide perceived flaws with styling, makeup or clothes, Constantly comparing your appearance with others, Frequently seeking reassurance about your appearance from others, Having perfectionist tendencies, Seeking cosmetic procedures with little satisfaction, Avoiding social situations.
Preoccupation with your appearance and excessive thoughts and repetitive behaviors can be unwanted, difficult to control and so time-consuming that they can cause major distress or problems in your social life, work, school or other areas of functioning.
You may excessively focus over one or more parts of your body. The feature that you focus on may change over time. The most common features people tend to fixate about include: Face, such as nose, complexion, wrinkles, acne and other blemishes, Hair, such as appearance, thinning and baldness, Skin and vein appearance, Breast size, Muscle size and tone, Genitalia.
A preoccupation with your body build being too small or not muscular enough (muscle dysmorphia) occurs almost exclusively in males.
Insight about body dysmorphic disorder varies. You may recognize that your beliefs about your perceived flaws may be excessive or not be true, or think that they probably are true, or be absolutely convinced that they're true. The more convinced you are of your beliefs, the more distress and disruption you may experience in your life.
Shame and embarrassment about your appearance may keep you from seeking treatment for body dysmorphic disorder. But if you have any signs or symptoms, see your primary care provider or a mental health professional.
Body dysmorphic disorder usually doesn't get better on its own. If left untreated, it may get worse over time, leading to anxiety, extensive medical bills, severe depression, and even suicidal thoughts and behavior.
Suicidal thoughts and behavior are common with body dysmorphic disorder. If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, get help right away:
Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
Call a suicide hotline number. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) or use its webchat at suicidepreventionlifeline.org/chat.
Call your mental health professional.
Seek help from your primary care provider.
Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.
It's not known specifically what causes body dysmorphic disorder. Like many other mental health conditions, body dysmorphic disorder may result from a combination of issues, such as a family history of the disorder, abnormalities in the brain, and negative evaluations or experiences about your body or self-image.
Body dysmorphic disorder typically starts in the early teenage years and it affects both males and females.
Certain factors seem to increase the risk of developing or triggering body dysmorphic disorder, including: Having blood relatives with body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder, Negative life experiences, such as childhood teasing, neglect or abuse, Certain personality traits, such as perfectionism, Societal pressure or expectations of beauty, Having another mental health condition, such as anxiety or depression.
Complications that may be caused by or associated with body dysmorphic disorder include, for example: Major depression or other mood disorders, Suicidal thoughts or behavior, Anxiety disorders, including social anxiety disorder (social phobia), Obsessive-compulsive disorder, Eating disorders, Substance misuse, Health problems from behaviors such as skin picking, Physical pain or risk of disfigurement due to repeated surgical interventions.
Body lice bites can cause intense itching and you may notice small areas of blood and crust on your skin at the site of the bite marks.
See your doctor if improved hygiene doesn't eliminate the infestation, or if you develop a skin infection from scratching the bites.
Body lice are similar to head lice, but have different habits. While head lice live in your hair and feed on your scalp, body lice typically live in your clothes and bedding. They travel to your skin several times a day to feed on blood.
The seams of your clothing are the most common places for body lice to lay their eggs (nits). You can become infested with body lice if you come into close contact with a person who has body lice, or with clothing or bedding that is infested with body lice.
People who are at higher risk of body lice tend to live in crowded, unclean conditions. They include: War refugees, Homeless people, Victims of natural disasters.
Dogs, cats and other pets do not spread body lice.
Body lice infestations usually cause minimal problems. However, a body lice infestation sometimes leads to complications such as:
Secondary infections. When body lice scratch and dig to feed on your blood, they may irritate your skin. If you scratch to alleviate itching, this also can irritate your skin. If your skin becomes raw from these irritations, other infections may develop.
Skin changes. If you're infested with body lice for a long time, you may experience skin changes such as thickening and discoloration — particularly around your waist, groin or upper thighs.
Spread of disease. Body lice can carry and spread some bacterial diseases, such as typhus, relapsing fever or trench fever.
Boils can occur anywhere on your skin, but appear mainly on the face, back of the neck, armpits, thighs and buttocks — hair-bearing areas where you're most likely to sweat or experience friction. Signs and symptoms of a boil usually include: A painful, red bump that starts out small and can enlarge to more than 2 inches (5 centimeters), Red, swollen skin around the bump, An increase in the size of the bump over a few days as it fills with pus, Development of a yellow-white tip that eventually ruptures and allows the pus to drain out.
A carbuncle is a cluster of boils that form a connected area of infection. Compared with single boils, carbuncles cause a deeper and more severe infection and are more likely to leave a scar. People who have a carbuncle often feel unwell in general and may experience a fever and chills.
You usually can care for a single, small boil yourself. But see your doctor if you have more than one boil at a time or if a boil: Occurs on your face or affects your vision, Worsens rapidly or is extremely painful, Causes a fever, Gets bigger despite self-care, Hasn't healed in two weeks, Recurs.
Most boils are caused by Staphylococcus aureus, a type of bacterium commonly found on the skin and inside the nose. A bump forms as pus collects under the skin. Boils sometimes develop at sites where the skin has been broken by a small injury or an insect bite, which gives the bacteria easy entry.
Although anyone — including otherwise healthy people — can develop boils or carbuncles, the following factors can increase your risk:
Close contact with a person who has a staph infection. You're more likely to develop an infection if you live with someone who has a boil or carbuncle.
Diabetes. This disease can make it more difficult for your body to fight infection, including bacterial infections of your skin.
Other skin conditions. Because they damage your skin's protective barrier, skin problems, such as acne and eczema, make you more susceptible to boils and carbuncles.
Compromised immunity. If your immune system is weakened for any reason, you're more susceptible to boils and carbuncles.
Rarely, bacteria from a boil or carbuncle can enter your bloodstream and travel to other parts of your body. The spreading infection, commonly known as blood poisoning (sepsis), can lead to infections deep within your body, such as your heart (endocarditis) and bone (osteomyelitis).
Signs and symptoms of bone cancer include: Bone pain, Swelling and tenderness near the affected area, Weakened bone, leading to fracture, Fatigue, Unintended weight loss.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you or your child develops bone pain that: Comes and goes, Becomes worse at night, Isn't helped by over-the-counter pain relievers.
The cause of most bone cancers is unknown. A small number of bone cancers have been linked to hereditary factors, while others are related to previous radiation exposure.
Bone cancers are broken down into separate types based on the type of cell where the cancer began. The most common types of bone cancer include:
Osteosarcoma. Osteosarcoma is the most common form of bone cancer. In this tumor, the cancerous cells produce bone. This variety of bone cancer occurs most often in children and young adults, in the bones of the leg or arm. In rare circumstances, osteosarcomas can arise outside of bones (extraskeletal osteosarcomas).
Chondrosarcoma. Chondrosarcoma is the second most common form of bone cancer. In this tumor, the cancerous cells produce cartilage. Chondrosarcoma usually occurs in the pelvis, legs or arms in middle-aged and older adults.
Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma tumors most commonly arise in the pelvis, legs or arms of children and young adults.
It's not clear what causes bone cancer, but doctors have found certain factors are associated with an increased risk, including:
Inherited genetic syndromes. Certain rare genetic syndromes passed through families increase the risk of bone cancer, including Li-Fraumeni syndrome and hereditary retinoblastoma.
Paget's disease of bone. Most commonly occurring in older adults, Paget's disease of bone can increase the risk of bone cancer developing later.
Radiation therapy for cancer. Exposure to large doses of radiation, such as those given during radiation therapy for cancer, increases the risk of bone cancer in the future.
Sometimes, bone metastasis causes no signs and symptoms.
When it does occur, signs and symptoms of bone metastasis include: Bone pain, Broken bones, Urinary incontinence, Bowel incontinence, Weakness in the legs or arms, High levels of calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia), which can cause nausea, vomiting, constipation and confusion.
If you experience persistent signs and symptoms that worry you, make an appointment with your doctor.
If you've been treated for cancer in the past, tell your doctor about your medical history and that you're concerned about your signs and symptoms.
Bone metastasis occurs when cancer cells break away from the original tumor and spread to the bones, where they begin to multiply.
Doctors aren't sure what causes some cancers to spread. And it's not clear why some cancers travel to the bones rather than to other common sites for metastasis, such as the liver.
Virtually any type of cancer can spread to the bones, but the cancers most likely to cause bone metastasis include: Breast cancer, Kidney cancer, Lung cancer, Lymphoma, Multiple myeloma, Prostate cancer, Thyroid cancer.
Most bone spurs cause no signs or symptoms. You might not realize you have bone spurs until an X-ray for another condition reveals the growths. In some cases, though, bone spurs can cause pain and loss of motion in your joints.
Specific symptoms depend on where the bone spurs are. Examples include:
Knee. Bone spurs in your knee can make it painful to extend and bend your leg.
Spine. On your vertebrae, bone spurs can narrow the space that contains your spinal cord. These bone spurs can pinch the spinal cord or its nerve roots and can cause weakness or numbness in your arms or legs.
Hip. Bone spurs can make it painful to move your hip, although you might feel the pain in your knee. Depending on their placement, bone spurs can reduce the range of motion in your hip joint.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have pain or swelling in one or more joints or if you have difficulty moving a joint.
Joint damage from osteoarthritis is the most common cause of bone spurs. As osteoarthritis breaks down the cartilage cushioning the ends of your bones, your body attempts to repair the loss by creating bone spurs near the damaged area.
The risk of bone spurs is higher in people who have arthritis.
Borderline personality disorder affects how you feel about yourself, how you relate to others and how you behave.
Signs and symptoms may include: An intense fear of abandonment, even going to extreme measures to avoid real or imagined separation or rejection, A pattern of unstable intense relationships, such as idealizing someone one moment and then suddenly believing the person doesn't care enough or is cruel, Rapid changes in self-identity and self-image that include shifting goals and values, and seeing yourself as bad or as if you don't exist at all, Periods of stress-related paranoia and loss of contact with reality, lasting from a few minutes to a few hours, Impulsive and risky behavior, such as gambling, reckless driving, unsafe sex, spending sprees, binge eating or drug abuse, or sabotaging success by suddenly quitting a good job or ending a positive relationship, Suicidal threats or behavior or self-injury, often in response to fear of separation or rejection, Wide mood swings lasting from a few hours to a few days, which can include intense happiness, irritability, shame or anxiety, Ongoing feelings of emptiness, Inappropriate, intense anger, such as frequently losing your temper, being sarcastic or bitter, or having physical fights.
If you're aware that you have any of the signs or symptoms above, talk to your doctor or a mental health provider.
If you have fantasies or mental images about hurting yourself or have other suicidal thoughts, get help right away by taking one of these actions:
Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
Call a suicide hotline number. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) any time of day. Use that same number and press "1" to reach the Veterans Crisis Line.
Call your mental health provider, doctor or other health care provider.
Reach out to a loved one, close friend, trusted peer or co-worker.
Contact someone from your faith community.
If you notice signs or symptoms in a family member or friend, talk to that person about seeing a doctor or mental health provider. But you can't force someone to seek help. If the relationship causes you significant stress, you may find it helpful to see a therapist yourself.
As with other mental health disorders, the causes of borderline personality disorder aren't fully understood.  In addition to environmental factors — such as a history of child abuse or neglect — borderline personality disorder may be linked to:
Genetics. Some studies of twins and families suggest that personality disorders may be inherited or strongly associated with other mental health disorders among family members.
Brain abnormalities. Some research has shown changes in certain areas of the brain involved in emotion regulation, impulsivity and aggression. In addition, certain brain chemicals that help regulate mood, such as serotonin, may not function properly.
Some factors related to personality development can increase the risk of developing borderline personality disorder. These include:
Hereditary predisposition. You may be at a higher risk if a close relative — your mother, father, brother or sister — has the same or a similar disorder.
Stressful childhood. Many people with the disorder report being sexually or physically abused or neglected during childhood. Some people have lost or were separated from a parent or close caregiver when they were young or had parents or caregivers with substance misuse or other mental health issues. Others have been exposed to hostile conflict and unstable family relationships.
Borderline personality disorder can damage many areas of your life. It can negatively affect intimate relationships, jobs, school, social activities and self-image, resulting in: Repeated job changes or losses, Not completing an education, Multiple legal issues, such as jail time, Conflict-filled relationships, marital stress or divorce, Self-injury, such as cutting or burning, and frequent hospitalizations, Involvement in abusive relationships, Unplanned pregnancies, sexually transmitted infections, motor vehicle accidents and physical fights due to impulsive and risky behavior, Attempted or completed suicide.
In addition, you may have other mental health disorders, such as: Depression, Alcohol or other substance misuse, Anxiety disorders, Eating disorders, Bipolar disorder, Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), Other personality disorders.
Signs and symptoms of foodborne botulism typically begin between 12 and 36 hours after the toxin gets into your body. But, depending on how much toxin was consumed, the start of symptoms may range from a few hours to a few days. Signs and symptoms of foodborne botulism include: Difficulty swallowing or speaking, Dry mouth, Facial weakness on both sides of the face, Blurred or double vision, Drooping eyelids, Trouble breathing, Nausea, vomiting and abdominal cramps, Paralysis.
Signs and symptoms of wound botulism appear about 10 days after the toxin has entered the body. Wound botulism signs and symptoms include: Difficulty swallowing or speaking, Facial weakness on both sides of the face, Blurred or double vision, Drooping eyelids, Trouble breathing, Paralysis.
The wound may or may not appear red and swollen.
If infant botulism is related to food, such as honey, problems generally begin within 18 to 36 hours after the toxin enters the baby's body. Signs and symptoms include: Constipation, which is often the first sign, Floppy movements due to muscle weakness and trouble controlling the head, Weak cry, Irritability, Drooling, Drooping eyelids, Tiredness, Difficulty sucking or feeding, Paralysis.
Certain signs and symptoms usually don't occur with botulism. For example, botulism doesn't generally increase blood pressure or heart rate, or cause fever or confusion. Sometimes, however, wound botulism may cause fever.
Seek urgent medical care if you suspect that you have botulism. Early treatment increases your chances of survival and lessens your risk of complications.
Seeking medical care promptly may also alert public health authorities. They may then be able to keep other people from eating contaminated food. Botulism isn't contagious from person to person.
The source of foodborne botulism is often home-canned foods that are low in acid, such as fruits, vegetables and fish. However, the disease has also occurred from spicy peppers (chiles), foil-wrapped baked potatoes and oil infused with garlic.
When you eat food containing the toxin, it disrupts nerve function, causing paralysis.
When C. botulinum bacteria get into a wound — possibly caused by an injury you might not notice — they can multiply and produce toxin. Wound botulism has increased in recent decades in people who inject heroin, which can contain spores of the bacteria. In fact, this type of botulism is more common in people who inject black tar heroin.
Babies get infant botulism after consuming spores of the bacteria, which then grow and multiply in their intestinal tracts and make toxins. The source of infant botulism may be honey, but it's more likely to be exposure to soil contaminated with the bacteria.
You might wonder how something so toxic could ever be beneficial, but scientists have found that the paralyzing effect of botulinum toxin makes it useful in certain circumstances.
Botulinum toxin has been used to reduce facial wrinkles by preventing contraction of muscles beneath the skin and for medical conditions, such as eyelid spasms and severe headaches. However, there have been rare occurrences of serious side effects, such as muscle paralysis extending beyond the treated area, with the use of botulinum toxin for medical reasons. Be sure to use a licensed doctor for any cosmetic or medical procedures using onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox).
Because it affects muscle control throughout your body, botulinum toxin can cause many complications. The most immediate danger is that you won't be able to breathe, which is the most common cause of death in botulism. Other complications, which may require rehabilitation, may include: Difficulty speaking, Trouble swallowing, Long-lasting weakness, Shortness of breath.
Signs and symptoms of a brachial plexus injury can vary greatly, depending on the severity and location of your injury. Usually only one arm is affected.
Minor damage often occurs during contact sports, such as football or wrestling, when the brachial plexus nerves get stretched or compressed. These are called stingers or burners, and can produce the following symptoms: A feeling like an electric shock or a burning sensation shooting down your arm, Numbness and weakness in your arm.
These symptoms usually last only a few seconds or minutes, but in some people the symptoms may linger for days or longer.
More-severe symptoms result from injuries that seriously injure or even tear or rupture the nerves. The most serious brachial plexus injury occurs when the nerve root is torn from the spinal cord.
Signs and symptoms of more-severe injuries can include: Weakness or inability to use certain muscles in your hand, arm or shoulder, Complete lack of movement and feeling in your arm, including your shoulder and hand, Severe pain.
Brachial plexus injuries can cause permanent weakness or disability. Even if yours seems minor, you may need medical care. See your doctor if you have: Recurrent burners and stingers, Weakness in your hand or arm, Neck pain, Symptoms in both arms.
Damage to the upper nerves that make up the brachial plexus tends to occur when your shoulder is forced down while your neck stretches up and away from the injured shoulder. The lower nerves are more likely to be injured when your arm is forced above your head.
These injuries can occur in several ways, including:
Contact sports. Many football players experience burners or stingers, which can occur when the nerves in the brachial plexus get stretched beyond their limit during collisions with other players.
Difficult births. Newborns can sustain brachial plexus injuries. These may be associated with high birth weight, breech presentation or prolonged labor. If an infant's shoulders get wedged within the birth canal, there is an increased risk of a brachial plexus palsy. Most often, the upper nerves are injured, a condition called Erb's palsy.
Trauma. Several types of trauma — including motor vehicle accidents, motorcycle accidents, falls or bullet wounds — can result in brachial plexus injuries.
Tumors and cancer treatments. Tumors can grow in or along the brachial plexus, or put pressure on the brachial plexus or spread to the nerves. Radiation treatments to the chest may cause damage to the brachial plexus.
Participating in contact sports, particularly football and wrestling, or being involved in high-speed motor-vehicle accidents increases your risk of brachial plexus injury.
Given enough time, many brachial plexus injuries in both children and adults heal with little if any lasting damage. But some injuries can cause temporary or permanent problems, such as:
Stiff joints. If you experience paralysis of your hand or arm, your joints can stiffen. This can make movement difficult, even if you eventually regain use of your limb. For that reason, your doctor is likely to recommend ongoing physical therapy during your recovery.
Pain. This results from nerve damage and may become chronic.
Numbness. If you lose feeling in your arm or hand, you run the risk of burning or injuring yourself without knowing it.
Muscle atrophy. Nerves regrow slowly and can take several years to heal after injury. During that time, lack of use may cause the affected muscles to break down.
Permanent disability. How well you recover from a serious brachial plexus injury depends on a number of factors, including your age and the type, location and severity of the injury. Even with surgery, some people experience permanent muscle weakness or paralysis.
If you have bradycardia, your brain and other organs might not get enough oxygen, possibly causing these symptoms: Near-fainting or fainting (syncope), Dizziness or lightheadedness, Fatigue, Shortness of breath, Chest pains, Confusion or memory problems, Easily tiring during physical activity.
A resting heart rate slower than 60 beats a minute is normal for some people, particularly healthy young adults and trained athletes. For them, bradycardia isn't considered a health problem.
A number of conditions can cause signs and symptoms of bradycardia. It's important to get a prompt, accurate diagnosis and appropriate care. See your doctor if you or your child has symptoms of bradycardia.
If you faint, have difficulty breathing or have chest pain lasting more than a few minutes, get emergency care or call 911 or your local emergency number. Seek emergency care for anyone with these symptoms.
Bradycardia can be caused by: Heart tissue damage related to aging, Damage to heart tissues from heart disease or heart attack, Heart disorder present at birth (congenital heart defect), Infection of heart tissue (myocarditis), A complication of heart surgery, Underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism), Imbalance of chemicals in the blood, such as potassium or calcium, Repeated disruption of breathing during sleep (obstructive sleep apnea), Inflammatory disease, such as rheumatic fever or lupus, Medications, including some drugs for other heart rhythm disorders, high blood pressure and psychosis.
Your heart comprises four chambers — two upper (atria) and two lower (ventricles). A natural pacemaker (the sinus node), situated in the right atrium, normally controls your heart rhythm by producing electrical impulses that initiate each heartbeat.
These electrical impulses travel across the atria, causing them to contract and pump blood into the ventricles. Then these impulses arrive at a cluster of cells called the atrioventricular (AV) node.
The AV node transmits the signal to a collection of cells called the bundle of His. These cells transmit the signal down a left branch serving the left ventricle and a right branch serving the right ventricle, which causes the ventricles to contract and pump blood — the right ventricle sending oxygen-poor blood to the lungs and the left ventricle sending oxygen-rich blood to the body.
Bradycardia occurs when electrical signals slow down or are blocked.
Bradycardia often starts in the sinus node. A slow heart rate might occur because the sinus node: Discharges electrical impulses slower than is normal, Pauses or fails to discharge at a regular rate, Discharges an electrical impulse that's blocked before causing the atria to contract.
In some people, the sinus node problems result in alternating slow and fast heart rates (bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome).
Bradycardia can also occur because electrical signals transmitted through the atria aren't transmitted to the ventricles (heart block, or atrioventricular block).
Heart blocks are classified based on the degree to which signals from the atria reach your heart's main pumping chambers (ventricles).
First-degree heart block. In the mildest form, all electrical signals from the atria reach the ventricles, but the signal is slowed. First-degree heart block rarely causes symptoms and usually needs no treatment if there's no other abnormality in electrical signal conduction.
Second-degree heart block. Not all electrical signals reach the ventricles. Some beats are "dropped," resulting in a slower and sometimes irregular rhythm.
Third-degree (complete) heart block. None of the electrical impulses from the atria reaches the ventricles. When this happens, a natural pacemaker takes over, but this results in slow and sometimes unreliable electrical impulses to control the beat of the ventricles.
A key risk factor for bradycardia is age. Heart problems, which are often associated with bradycardia, are more common in older adults.
Bradycardia is often associated with damage to heart tissue from some type of heart disease.
Therefore, factors that increase your risk of heart disease can also increase the risk of bradycardia. Lifestyle changes or medical treatment might decrease the risk of heart disease associated with the following factors: High blood pressure, Smoking, Heavy alcohol use, Recreational drug use, Psychological stress or anxiety.
If bradycardia causes symptoms, possible complications can include: Frequent fainting spells, Inability of the heart to pump enough blood (heart failure), Sudden cardiac arrest or sudden death.
A sudden, severe headache is the key symptom of a ruptured aneurysm. This headache is often described as the "worst headache" ever experienced.
Common signs and symptoms of a ruptured aneurysm include: Sudden, extremely severe headache, Nausea and vomiting, Stiff neck, Blurred or double vision, Sensitivity to light, Seizure, A drooping eyelid, Loss of consciousness, Confusion.
In some cases, an aneurysm may leak a slight amount of blood. This leaking (sentinel bleed) may cause only a: Sudden, extremely severe headache.
A more severe rupture often follows leaking.
An unruptured brain aneurysm may produce no symptoms, particularly if it's small. However, a larger unruptured aneurysm may press on brain tissues and nerves, possibly causing: Pain above and behind one eye, A dilated pupil, Change in vision or double vision, Numbness of one side of the face.
Seek immediate medical attention if you develop a: Sudden, extremely severe headache.
If you're with someone who complains of a sudden, severe headache or who loses consciousness or has a seizure, call 911 or your local emergency number.
Brain aneurysms develop as a result of thinning artery walls. Aneurysms often form at forks or branches in arteries because those sections of the vessel are weaker.
Although aneurysms can appear anywhere in the brain, they are most common in arteries at the base of the brain.
The causes of brain aneurysm are unknown, but a range of factors may increase your risk.
A number of factors can contribute to weakness in an artery wall and increase the risk of a brain aneurysm or aneurysm rupture. Brain aneurysms are more common in adults than in children and more common in women than in men.
Some of these risk factors develop over time; others are present at birth.
These include: Older age, Cigarette smoking, High blood pressure (hypertension), Drug abuse, particularly the use of cocaine, Heavy alcohol consumption.
Some types of aneurysms may occur after a head injury (dissecting aneurysm) or from certain blood infections (mycotic aneurysm).
Selected conditions that date to birth can be associated with an elevated risk of developing a brain aneurysm. These include: Inherited connective tissue disorders, such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, that weaken blood vessels, Polycystic kidney disease, an inherited disorder that results in fluid-filled sacs in the kidneys and usually increases blood pressure, Abnormally narrow aorta (coarctation of the aorta), the large blood vessel that delivers oxygen-rich blood from the heart to the body, Cerebral arteriovenous malformation (brain AVM), an abnormal connection between arteries and veins in the brain that interrupts the normal flow of blood between them, Family history of brain aneurysm, particularly a first-degree relative, such as a parent, brother, sister, or child.
When a brain aneurysm ruptures, the bleeding usually lasts only a few seconds. The blood can cause direct damage to surrounding cells, and the bleeding can damage or kill other cells. It also increases pressure inside the skull.
If the pressure becomes too elevated, the blood and oxygen supply to the brain may be disrupted to the point that loss of consciousness or even death may occur.
Complications that can develop after the rupture of an aneurysm include:
Re-bleeding. An aneurysm that has ruptured or leaked is at risk of bleeding again. Re-bleeding can cause further damage to brain cells.
Vasospasm. After a brain aneurysm ruptures, blood vessels in your brain may narrow erratically (vasospasm). This condition can limit blood flow to brain cells (ischemic stroke) and cause additional cell damage and loss.
Hydrocephalus. When an aneurysm rupture results in bleeding in the space between the brain and surrounding tissue (subarachnoid hemorrhage) — most often the case — the blood can block circulation of the fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord (cerebrospinal fluid). This condition can result in an excess of cerebrospinal fluid that increases pressure on the brain and can damage tissues (hydrocephalus).
Hyponatremia. Subarachnoid hemorrhage from a ruptured brain aneurysm can disrupt the balance of sodium in the blood. This may occur from damage to the hypothalamus, an area near the base of the brain.
A drop in blood-sodium levels (hyponatremia) can lead to swelling of brain cells and permanent damage.
A brain arteriovenous malformation may not cause any signs or symptoms until the AVM ruptures, resulting in bleeding in the brain (hemorrhage). In about half of all brain AVMs, hemorrhage is the first sign.
But some people with brain AVM may experience signs and symptoms other than bleeding related to the AVM.
In people without hemorrhage, signs and symptoms of a brain AVM may include: Seizures, Headache or pain in one area of the head, Muscle weakness or numbness in one part of the body.
Some people may experience more-serious neurological signs and symptoms, depending on the location of the AVM, including: Severe headache, Weakness, numbness or paralysis, Vision loss, Difficulty speaking, Confusion or inability to understand others, Severe unsteadiness.
Symptoms may begin at any age but usually emerge between ages 10 and 40. Brain AVMs can damage brain tissue over time. The effects slowly build up and often cause symptoms in early adulthood.
Once you reach middle age, however, brain AVMs tend to remain stable and are less likely to cause symptoms.
Some pregnant women may have worsened symptoms due to changes in blood volume and blood pressure.
One severe type of brain AVM, called a vein of Galen defect, causes signs and symptoms that emerge soon or immediately after birth. The major blood vessel involved in this type of brain AVM can cause fluid to build up in the brain and the head to swell. Signs and symptoms include swollen veins that are visible on the scalp, seizures, failure to thrive and congestive heart failure.
Seek immediate medical attention if you notice any signs or symptoms of a brain AVM, such as seizures, headaches or other symptoms. A bleeding brain AVM is life-threatening and requires emergency medical attention.
The cause of brain AVM is unknown, but researchers believe most brain AVMs emerge during fetal development.
Normally, your heart sends oxygen-rich blood to your brain through arteries. The arteries slow blood flow by passing it through a series of progressively smaller networks of blood vessels, ending with the smallest blood vessels (capillaries). The capillaries slowly deliver oxygen through their thin, porous walls to the surrounding brain tissue.
The oxygen-depleted blood then passes into small blood vessels and then into larger veins that drain the blood from your brain, returning it to your heart and lungs to get more oxygen.
The arteries and veins in an AVM lack this supporting network of smaller blood vessels and capillaries. Instead, the abnormal connection causes blood to flow quickly and directly from your arteries to your veins, bypassing the surrounding tissues.
Anyone can be born with a brain AVM, but these factors may be a risk:
Being male. AVMs are more common in males.
Having a family history. Cases of AVMs in families have been reported, but it's unclear if there's a certain genetic factor or if the cases are only coincidental. It's also possible to inherit other medical conditions that predispose you to having vascular malformations such as AVMs.
Complications of a brain AVM include:
Bleeding in the brain (hemorrhage). An AVM puts extreme pressure on the walls of the affected arteries and veins, causing them to become thin or weak. This may result in the AVM rupturing and bleeding into the brain (a hemorrhage).
This risk of a brain AVM bleeding ranges around 2 percent each year. The risk of hemorrhage may be higher for certain types of AVMs, or if you have experienced previous AVM ruptures.
Some hemorrhages associated with AVMs go undetected because they cause no major brain damage or symptoms, but potentially life-threatening bleeding episodes may occur.
Brain AVMs account for about 2 percent of all hemorrhagic strokes each year and are often the cause of hemorrhage in children and young adults who experience brain hemorrhage.
Reduced oxygen to brain tissue. With an AVM, blood bypasses the network of capillaries and flows directly from arteries to veins. Blood rushes quickly through the altered path because it isn't slowed down by channels of smaller blood vessels.
Surrounding brain tissues can't easily absorb oxygen from the fast-flowing blood. Without enough oxygen, brain tissues weaken or may die off completely. This results in stroke-like symptoms, such as difficulty speaking, weakness, numbness, vision loss or severe unsteadiness.
Thin or weak blood vessels. An AVM puts extreme pressure on the thin and weak walls of the blood vessels. A bulge in a blood vessel wall (aneurysm) may develop and become susceptible to rupture.
Brain damage. As you grow, your body may recruit more arteries to supply blood to the fast-flowing AVM. As a result, some AVMs may get bigger and displace or compress portions of the brain. This may prevent protective fluids from flowing freely around the hemispheres of the brain.
If fluid builds up, it can push brain tissue up against the skull (hydrocephalus).
Brain tumor symptoms vary depending on the tumors' size, number, location and rate of growth.
Signs and symptoms of brain metastases include: Headache, sometimes with vomiting or nausea, Mental changes, such as increasing memory problems, Seizures, Dizziness.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have persistent signs and symptoms that concern you. If you've been treated for cancer in the past, tell your doctor about your medical history.
Brain metastases occur when cancer cells travel through the bloodstream or the lymph system from the original tumor and spread (metastasize) to the brain. There they begin to multiply. Metastatic cancer that spreads from its original location is known by the name of the primary cancer. For example, cancer that has spread from the breast to the brain is called metastatic breast cancer, not brain cancer.
There are many theories about what causes some cancers to spread and why some cancers travel to the brain. Brain metastases from lung cancer are often found early in the course of the disease, and those from breast cancer develop late.
Any type of cancer can spread to the brain, but having one of the following types of cancer puts you at increased risk of brain metastases: Lung cancer, Breast cancer, Colon cancer, Kidney cancer, Melanoma.
Signs and symptoms of breast cancer may include: A breast lump or thickening that feels different from the surrounding tissue, Change in the size, shape or appearance of a breast, Changes to the skin over the breast, such as dimpling, A newly inverted nipple, Peeling, scaling, crusting or flaking of the pigmented area of skin surrounding the nipple (areola) or breast skin, Redness or pitting of the skin over your breast, like the skin of an orange.
If you find a lump or other change in your breast — even if a recent mammogram was normal — make an appointment with your doctor for prompt evaluation.
Doctors know that breast cancer occurs when some breast cells begin to grow abnormally. These cells divide more rapidly than healthy cells do and continue to accumulate, forming a lump or mass. Cells may spread (metastasize) through your breast to your lymph nodes or to other parts of your body.
Breast cancer most often begins with cells in the milk-producing ducts (invasive ductal carcinoma). Breast cancer may also begin in the glandular tissue called lobules (invasive lobular carcinoma) or in other cells or tissue within the breast.
Researchers have identified hormonal, lifestyle and environmental factors that may increase your risk of breast cancer. But it's not clear why some people who have no risk factors develop cancer, yet other people with risk factors never do. It's likely that breast cancer is caused by a complex interaction of your genetic makeup and your environment.
Doctors estimate that about 5 to 10 percent of breast cancers are linked to gene mutations passed through generations of a family.
A number of inherited mutated genes that can increase the likelihood of breast cancer have been identified. The most well-known are breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) and breast cancer gene 2 (BRCA2), both of which significantly increase the risk of both breast and ovarian cancer.
If you have a strong family history of breast cancer or other cancers, your doctor may recommend a blood test to help identify specific mutations in BRCA or other genes that are being passed through your family.
Consider asking your doctor for a referral to a genetic counselor, who can review your family health history. A genetic counselor can also discuss the benefits, risks and limitations of genetic testing to assist you with shared decision-making.
A breast cancer risk factor is anything that makes it more likely you'll get breast cancer. But having one or even several breast cancer risk factors doesn't necessarily mean you'll develop breast cancer. Many women who develop breast cancer have no known risk factors other than simply being women.
Factors that are associated with an increased risk of breast cancer include:
Being female. Women are much more likely than men are to develop breast cancer.
Increasing age. Your risk of breast cancer increases as you age.
A personal history of breast conditions. If you've had a breast biopsy that found lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) or atypical hyperplasia of the breast, you have an increased risk of breast cancer.
A personal history of breast cancer. If you've had breast cancer in one breast, you have an increased risk of developing cancer in the other breast.
A family history of breast cancer. If your mother, sister or daughter was diagnosed with breast cancer, particularly at a young age, your risk of breast cancer is increased. Still, the majority of people diagnosed with breast cancer have no family history of the disease.
Inherited genes that increase cancer risk. Certain gene mutations that increase the risk of breast cancer can be passed from parents to children. The most well-known gene mutations are referred to as BRCA1 and BRCA2. These genes can greatly increase your risk of breast cancer and other cancers, but they don't make cancer inevitable.
Radiation exposure. If you received radiation treatments to your chest as a child or young adult, your risk of breast cancer is increased.
Obesity. Being obese increases your risk of breast cancer.
Beginning your period at a younger age. Beginning your period before age 12 increases your risk of breast cancer.
Beginning menopause at an older age. If you began menopause at an older age, you're more likely to develop breast cancer.
Having your first child at an older age. Women who give birth to their first child after age 30 may have an increased risk of breast cancer.
Having never been pregnant. Women who have never been pregnant have a greater risk of breast cancer than do women who have had one or more pregnancies.
Postmenopausal hormone therapy. Women who take hormone therapy medications that combine estrogen and progesterone to treat the signs and symptoms of menopause have an increased risk of breast cancer. The risk of breast cancer decreases when women stop taking these medications.
Drinking alcohol. Drinking alcohol increases the risk of breast cancer.
Breast cysts may be found in one or both breasts. Signs and symptoms of a breast cyst include: A smooth, easily movable round or oval lump with distinct edges (which typically, though not always, indicates it's benign), Nipple discharge that may be clear, yellow, straw colored or dark brown, Breast pain or tenderness in the area of the breast lump, Increase in breast lump size and breast tenderness just before your period, Decrease in breast lump size and resolution of other symptoms after your period.
Having breast cysts doesn't increase your risk of breast cancer. But having cysts may make it more difficult to find new breast lumps or other changes that might need evaluation by your doctor. Be familiar with how your breasts normally feel so that you'll know when something changes.
Normal breast tissue often feels lumpy or nodular. But if you feel any new breast lumps that persist after a menstrual period, or if an existing breast lump grows or changes, see your doctor right away.
Each of your breasts contains lobes of glandular tissue, arranged like petals of a daisy. The lobes are divided into smaller lobules that produce milk during pregnancy and breast-feeding. The supporting tissue that gives the breast its shape is made up of fatty tissue and fibrous connective tissue.  Breast cysts develop as a result of fluid accumulation inside the glands in the breasts.
Breast cysts may be defined by their size:
Microcysts are too small to feel, but may be seen during imaging tests, such as mammography or ultrasound.
Macrocysts are large enough to be felt and can grow to about 1 to 2 inches (2.5 to 5 centimeters) in diameter. Large breast cysts can put pressure on nearby breast tissue, causing breast pain or discomfort.
Experts don't know what causes breast cysts. They may develop as a result of hormonal changes from monthly menstruation. Some evidence suggests that excess estrogen in your body, which can stimulate the breast tissue, may contribute to breast cysts.
Most cases of breast pain are classified as either cyclic or noncyclic. Each type of breast pain has distinct characteristics.
The term "extramammary" means "outside the breast." Extramammary breast pain feels like it starts in the breast tissue, but its source is actually somewhere else. Pulling a muscle in your chest, for example, can cause pain in your chest wall or rib cage that spreads (radiates) to your breast.
Make an appointment with your doctor if breast pain: Continues daily for more than a couple of weeks, Occurs in one specific area of your breast, Seems to be getting worse over time, Interferes with daily activities.
Although breast cancer risk is low in women whose main symptom is breast pain, if your doctor recommends an evaluation, it's important to follow through.
Sometimes, it's not possible to identify the exact cause of breast pain. Contributing factors may include one or more of the following:
Reproductive hormones. Cyclic breast pain appears to have a strong link to hormones and your menstrual cycle. Cyclic breast pain often decreases or disappears with pregnancy or menopause.
Breast structure. Noncyclic breast pain often results from changes that occur in the milk ducts or milk glands. This can result in the development of breast cysts. Breast trauma, prior breast surgery or other factors localized to the breast can lead to breast pain. Breast pain may also start outside the breast — in the chest wall, muscles, joints or heart, for example — and radiate to the breast.
Fatty acid imbalance. An imbalance of fatty acids within the cells may affect the sensitivity of breast tissue to circulating hormones.
Medication use. Certain hormonal medications, including some infertility treatments and oral birth control pills, may be associated with breast pain. Also, breast tenderness is a possible side effect of estrogen and progesterone hormone therapies that are used after menopause. Breast pain may be associated with certain antidepressants, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants.
Breast size. Women with large breasts may have noncyclic breast pain related to the size of their breasts. Neck, shoulder and back pain may accompany breast pain due to large breasts.
Breast surgery. Breast pain associated with breast surgery and scar formation can sometimes linger after incisions have healed.
If you have a broken ankle, you may experience some of the following signs and symptoms: Immediate, throbbing pain, Swelling, Bruising, Tenderness, Deformity, Difficulty or pain with walking or bearing weight.
See a doctor if there is obvious deformity, if the pain and swelling don't get better with self-care, or if the pain and swelling get worse over time. Also, see a doctor if the injury interferes with walking.
A broken ankle is usually a result of a twisting injury, but can also be caused by a direct blow to the ankle.
The most common causes of a broken ankle include:
Car accidents. The crushing injuries common in car accidents may cause breaks that require surgical repair.
Falls. Tripping and falling can break bones in your ankles, as can landing on your feet after jumping down from just a slight height.
Missteps. Sometimes just putting your foot down wrong can result in a twisting injury that can cause a broken bone.
You may be at higher risk of a broken ankle if you:
Participate in high-impact sports. The stresses, direct blows and twisting injuries that occur in sports such as basketball, football, gymnastics, tennis and soccer can cause ankle fractures.
Use improper technique or sports equipment. Faulty equipment, such as shoes that are too worn or not properly fitted, can contribute to stress fractures and falls. Improper training techniques, such as not warming up and stretching, also can cause ankle injuries.
Suddenly increase your activity level. Whether you're a trained athlete or someone who's just started exercising, suddenly boosting the frequency or duration of your exercise sessions can increase your risk of a stress fracture.
Keep your home cluttered or poorly lit. Walking around in a house with too much clutter or too little light may lead to falls and ankle injuries.
Have certain conditions. Having decreased bone density (osteoporosis) can put you at risk of injuries to your ankle bones.
Smoking. Cigarette smoking can increase your risk of developing osteoporosis. Studies also show that healing after a fracture may take longer in people who smoke.
Complications of a broken ankle are uncommon but may include:
Arthritis. Fractures that extend into the joint can cause arthritis years later. If your ankle starts to hurt long after a break, see your doctor for an evaluation.
Bone infection (osteomyelitis). If you have an open fracture, meaning one end of the bone protrudes through the skin, your bone may be exposed to bacteria that cause infection.
Compartment syndrome. This condition can rarely occur with ankle fractures. It causes pain, swelling and sometimes disability in affected muscles of the legs.
Nerve or blood vessel damage. Trauma to the ankle can injure nerves and blood vessels, sometimes actually tearing them. Seek immediate attention if you notice any numbness or circulation problems. Lack of blood flow can cause a bone to die and collapse.
A snap or cracking sound might be your first indication you've broken an arm. Signs and symptoms include: Severe pain, which might increase with movement, Swelling, Bruising, Deformity, such as a bent arm or wrist, Inability to turn your arm from palm up to palm down or vice versa.
If you have enough pain in your arm that you can't use it normally, see a doctor right away. The same applies to your child. Delays in diagnosis and treatment of a broken arm, especially for children, who heal faster than adults do, can lead to poor healing.
Common causes for a broken arm include:
Falls. Falling onto an outstretched hand or elbow is the most common cause of a broken arm.
Sports injuries. Direct blows and injuries on the field or court cause all types of arm fractures.
Significant trauma. Any of your arm bones can break during a car accident, bike accident or other direct trauma.
Child abuse. In children, a broken arm might be the result of child abuse.
Certain medical conditions or physical activities can increase the risk of a broken arm.
Any sport that involves physical contact or increases your risk of falling — including football, soccer, gymnastics, skiing and skateboarding — also increases the risk of a broken arm.
Conditions that weaken bones, such as osteoporosis and bone tumors, increase your risk of a broken arm. This type of break is known as a pathological fracture.
The prognosis for most arm fractures is very good if treated early. But complications can include:
Uneven growth. Because a child's arm bones are still growing, a fracture in the area where growth occurs near each end of a long bone (growth plate) can interfere with that bone's growth.
Osteoarthritis. Fractures that extend into a joint can cause arthritis there years later.
Stiffness. The immobilization required to heal a fracture in the upper arm bone can sometimes result in painfully limited range of motion of the elbow or shoulder.
Bone infection. If a part of your broken bone protrudes through your skin, it can be exposed to germs that can cause infection. Prompt treatment of this type of fracture is critical.
Nerve or blood vessel injury. If the upper arm bone (humerus) fractures into two or more pieces, the jagged ends can injure nearby nerves and blood vessels. Seek immediate medical attention if you notice numbness or circulation problems.
Compartment syndrome. Excessive swelling of the injured arm can cut off the blood supply to part of the arm, causing pain and numbness. Typically occurring 24 to 48 hours after the injury, compartment syndrome is a medical emergency that requires surgery.
Signs and symptoms of a broken collarbone include: Pain that increases with shoulder movement, Swelling, Tenderness, Bruising, A bulge on or near your shoulder, A grinding or crackling sound when you try to move your shoulder, Stiffness or inability to move your shoulder, Newborn children will often not move their arm for several days following a birth-related collarbone fracture..
If you notice signs or symptoms of a broken collarbone in you or your child, or if there's enough pain to prevent normal use, see a doctor right away. Delays in diagnosis and treatment can lead to poor healing.
Common causes of a broken collarbone include:
Falls, such as falling onto your shoulder or onto your outstretched hand.
Sports injuries, such as a direct blow to your shoulder on the field, rink or court.
Vehicle trauma from a car, motorcycle or bike accident.
Birth injury from passing through the birth canal.
Your collarbone doesn't harden completely until about age 20. This puts children and teenagers at higher risk of a broken collarbone. The risk decreases after age 20, but then rises again in older people as bone strength decreases with age.
Most broken collarbones heal without difficulty. Complications, when they occur, might include:
Nerve or blood vessel injury. The jagged ends of a broken collarbone may injure nearby nerves and blood vessels. Seek immediate medical attention if you notice numbness or coldness in your arm or hand.
Poor or delayed healing. A severely broken collarbone might heal slowly or incompletely. Poor union of the bones during healing can shorten the bone.
A lump in the bone. As part of the healing process, the place where the bone knits together forms a bony lump. This lump is easy to see because it's close to the skin. Most lumps disappear over time, but some are permanent.
Osteoarthritis. A fracture that involves the joints that connect your collarbone to your shoulder blade or your breastbone might increase your risk of eventually developing arthritis in that joint.
If you have a broken foot, you may experience some of the following signs and symptoms: Immediate, throbbing pain, Pain that increases with activity and decreases with rest, Swelling, Bruising, Tenderness, Deformity, Difficulty in walking or bearing weight.
See a doctor if there is obvious deformity, if the pain and swelling don't get better with self-care, or if the pain and swelling gets worse over time. Also, see a doctor if the injury interferes with walking.
The most common causes of a broken foot include:
Car accidents. The crushing injuries common in car accidents may cause breaks that require surgical repair.
Falls. Tripping and falling can break bones in your feet, as can landing on your feet after jumping down from just a slight height.
Impact from a heavy weight. Dropping something heavy on your foot is a common cause of fractures.
Missteps. Sometimes just putting your foot down wrong can result in a broken bone. A toe can get broken from stubbing your toes on furniture.
Overuse. Stress fractures are common in the weight-bearing bones of your feet. These tiny cracks are usually caused over time by repetitive force or overuse, such as running long distances. But they can also occur with normal use of a bone that's been weakened by a condition such as osteoporosis.
You may be at higher risk of a broken foot or ankle if you:
Participate in high-impact sports. The stresses, direct blows and twisting injuries that occur in sports such as basketball, football, gymnastics, tennis and soccer can causes foot fractures.
Use improper technique or sports equipment. Faulty equipment, such as shoes that are too worn or not properly fitted, can contribute to stress fractures and falls. Improper training techniques, such as not warming up and stretching, also can cause foot injuries.
Suddenly increase your activity level. Whether you're a trained athlete or someone who's just started exercising, suddenly boosting the frequency or duration of your exercise sessions can increase your risk of a stress fracture.
Work in certain occupations. Certain work environments, such as a construction site, put you at risk of falling from a height or dropping something heavy on your foot.
Keep your home cluttered or poorly lit. Walking around in a house with too much clutter or too little light may lead to falls and foot injuries.
Have certain conditions. Having decreased bone density (osteoporosis) can put you at risk of injuries to your foot bones.
Complications of a broken foot are uncommon but may include:
Arthritis. Fractures that extend into a joint can cause arthritis years later. If your foot starts to hurt long after a break, see your doctor for an evaluation.
Bone infection (osteomyelitis). If you have an open fracture, meaning one end of the bone protrudes through the skin, your bone may be exposed to bacteria that cause infection.
Nerve or blood vessel damage. Trauma to the foot can injure adjacent nerves and blood vessels, sometimes actually tearing them. Seek immediate attention if you notice any numbness or circulation problems. Lack of blood flow can cause a bone to die and collapse.
A broken hand might cause these signs and symptoms: Severe pain that might worsen when gripping or squeezing or moving your hand, Swelling, Tenderness, Bruising, Obvious deformity, such as a crooked finger, Stiffness or inability to move your fingers or thumb, Numbness in your hand or fingers.
If you think you might have a broken hand, see a doctor immediately, especially if you have numbness, swelling or trouble moving your fingers. A delay in diagnosis and treatment can lead to poor healing, decreased range of motion and decreased grip strength.
Hand fractures can be caused by a direct blow or crushing injury. Motor vehicle crashes can cause hand bones to break, sometimes into many pieces, and often require surgical repair.
Your risk of a broken hand may be increased if you participate in sports like football, soccer, rugby, or hockey. Osteoporosis, a condition that weakens bones, may also increase your risk of a broken hand.
Complications of a broken hand are rare, but they might include:
Ongoing stiffness, aching or disability. Stiffness, pain or aching in the affected area generally goes away eventually after your cast is removed or after surgery. However, some people have permanent stiffness or pain. Be patient with your recovery, and talk to your doctor about exercises that might help or for a referral to physical or occupational therapy.
Osteoarthritis. Fractures that extend into a joint can cause arthritis years later. If your hand starts to hurt or swell long after a break, see your doctor for an evaluation.
Nerve or blood vessel damage. Trauma to the hand can injure adjacent nerves and blood vessels. Seek immediate attention if you have numbness or circulation problems.
Broken heart syndrome symptoms can mimic a heart attack. Common symptoms include: Chest pain, Shortness of breath.
Any long-lasting or persistent chest pain could be a sign of a heart attack, so it's important to take it seriously and call 911 if you experience chest pain.
If you're having any chest pain, a very rapid or irregular heartbeat, or shortness of breath after a stressful event, call 911 or emergency medical assistance immediately.
The exact cause of broken heart syndrome is unclear. It's thought that a surge of stress hormones, such as adrenaline, might temporarily damage the hearts of some people. How these hormones might hurt the heart or whether something else is responsible isn't completely clear.
A temporary constriction of the large or small arteries of the heart has been suspected to play a role. People who have broken heart syndrome may also have a difference in the structure of the heart muscle.
Broken heart syndrome is often preceded by an intense physical or emotional event. Some potential triggers of broken heart syndrome are: The death of a loved one, A frightening medical diagnosis, Domestic abuse, Losing — or even winning — a lot of money, Strong arguments, A surprise party, Public speaking, Job loss or financial difficulty, Divorce, Physical stressors, such as an asthma attack, COVID-19 infection, a broken bone or major surgery.
It's also possible that some drugs, rarely, may cause broken heart syndrome by causing a surge of stress hormones. Drugs that may contribute to broken heart syndrome include: Epinephrine (EpiPen, EpiPen Jr.), which is used to treat severe allergic reactions or a severe asthma attack, Duloxetine (Cymbalta), a medication given to treat nerve problems in people with diabetes, or as a treatment for depression, Venlafaxine (Effexor XR), a treatment for depression, Levothyroxine (Synthroid, Levoxyl), a drug given to people whose thyroid glands don't work properly, Unprescribed or illegal stimulants, such as methamphetamine and cocaine.
Heart attacks are generally caused by a complete or near complete blockage of a heart artery. This blockage is due to a blood clot forming at the site of narrowing from fatty buildup (atherosclerosis) in the wall of the artery. In broken heart syndrome, the heart arteries are not blocked, although blood flow in the arteries of the heart may be reduced.
There are a number of known risk factors for broken heart syndrome, including:
Sex. The condition affects women far more often than men.
Age. It appears that most people who have broken heart syndrome are older than 50.
A history of a neurological condition. People who have neurological disorders, such as a head injury or a seizure disorder (epilepsy) have a greater risk of broken heart syndrome.
A previous or current psychiatric disorder. If you've had disorders, such as anxiety or depression, you probably have a higher risk of broken heart syndrome.
In rare cases, broken heart syndrome is fatal. However, most people who experience broken heart syndrome quickly recover and don't have long-lasting effects.
Other complications of broken heart syndrome include: Backup of fluid into your lungs (pulmonary edema), Low blood pressure (hypotension), Disruptions in your heartbeat, Heart failure.
It's also possible that you may have broken heart syndrome again if you have another stressful event. However, the odds of this happening are low.
A broken thighbone (femur) — the strongest bone in your body — usually is obvious because it takes so much force to break. But fractures of your shinbone (tibia) — the major weight-bearing bone in your lower leg — and the bone that runs alongside your tibia below your knee (fibula) may be more subtle.
Signs and symptoms of a broken leg may include: Severe pain, which may worsen with movement, Swelling, Tenderness, Bruising, Obvious deformity or shortening of the affected leg, Inability to walk.
Toddlers or young children who break a leg may simply stop walking, even if they can't explain why. Unexplained crying may be a symptom of a toddler who has a fracture.
If you or your child has any signs or symptoms of a broken leg, see a doctor right away. Delays in diagnosis and treatment can result in problems later, including poor healing.
Seek emergency medical attention for any leg fracture from a high-impact trauma, such as a car or motorcycle accident. Fractures of the thighbone are severe, potentially life-threatening injuries that require emergency medical services to help protect the area from further damage and to transfer you safely to your local hospital.
There are a number of ways you can break a leg, including:
Falls. A simple fall can fracture one or both of the lower leg bones. However, the thighbone is unlikely to be broken without more significant trauma.
Motor vehicle accidents. All three leg bones can break during a motor vehicle accident. Fractures can occur when your knees become jammed against the dashboard during a collision.
Sports injuries. Hyperextending your leg during contact sports can cause a broken leg. So can a direct blow — such as from a hockey stick or an opponent's body.
Child abuse. In children, a broken leg may be the result of child abuse, especially when such an injury occurs before the child can walk.
Overuse. Stress fractures are tiny cracks that develop in the weight-bearing bones of your body, including your shinbone. Stress fractures are usually caused by repetitive force or overuse, such as running long distances. But they can also occur with normal use of a bone that's been weakened by a condition such as osteoporosis.
Stress fractures are often the result of repetitive stress to the leg bones from physical activities, such as: Running, Ballet dancing, Basketball, Marching.
Contact sports, such as hockey and football, also may pose a risk of direct blows to the leg, which can result in a fracture.
Stress fractures outside of sport situations are more common in people who have: Decreased bone density (osteoporosis), Diabetes, Rheumatoid arthritis.
Complications of a broken leg may include:
Knee or ankle pain. A broken bone in your leg may produce pain in your knee or ankle.
Poor or delayed healing. A severe leg fracture may not heal quickly or completely. This is particularly common in an open fracture of your tibia because of lower blood flow to this bone.
Bone infection (osteomyelitis). If you have an open fracture, your bone may be exposed to fungi and bacteria that can cause infection.
Nerve or blood vessel damage. Fracture of the leg can injure adjacent nerves and blood vessels. Seek immediate medical help if you notice any numbness or circulation problems.
Compartment syndrome. This neuromuscular condition causes pain, swelling and sometimes disability in muscles near the broken bone. This is a rare complication that is more common with high-impact injuries, such as a car or motorcycle accident.
Arthritis. Fractures that extend into the joint and poor bone alignment can cause osteoarthritis years later. If your leg starts to hurt long after a break, see your doctor for an evaluation.
Unequal leg length. The long bones of a child grow from the ends of the bones, in softer areas called growth plates. If a fracture goes through a growth plate, that limb might eventually become shorter or longer than the opposite limb.
Signs and symptoms of a broken nose: Pain or tenderness, especially when touching your nose, Swelling of your nose and surrounding areas, Bleeding from your nose, Bruising around your nose or eyes, Crooked or misshapen nose, Difficulty breathing through your nose, Discharge of mucus from your nose, Feeling that one or both of your nasal passages are blocked.
Seek emergency medical attention if you experience a nose injury accompanied by: A head or neck injury, which may be marked by severe headache, neck pain, vomiting or loss of consciousness, Difficulty breathing, Bleeding you can't stop, A noticeable change in the shape of your nose that isn't related to swelling, such as a crooked or twisted appearance, Clear, watery fluid draining from your nose.
Common causes of a broken nose include: Injury from contact sports, such as football or hockey, Physical altercations, Motor vehicle accidents, Falls.
A broken nose can even be caused by walking into a fixed object, such as a door or wall, or by rough, wrestling-type play.
Any activity that increases your risk of a facial injury increases your risk of a broken nose. Such activities may include: Playing contact sports, such as football and hockey, especially without a helmet that has a face mask, Engaging in a physical fight, Riding a bicycle, Lifting weights, especially if you don't use a spotter, Riding in a motor vehicle, especially without a seat belt.
Complications or injuries related to a broken nose may include:
Deviated septum. A nose fracture may cause a deviated septum, a condition that occurs when the thin wall dividing the two sides of your nose (nasal septum) is displaced, narrowing your nasal passage. Medications, such as decongestants and antihistamines, can help you manage a deviated septum, but surgery is required to correct the condition.
Collection of blood. Sometimes, pools of clotted blood form in a broken nose, creating a condition called a septal hematoma. A septal hematoma can block one or both nostrils. Septal hematoma requires prompt surgical drainage to prevent cartilage damage.
Cartilage fracture. If your fracture is due to a forceful blow, such as from an automobile accident, you also may experience a cartilage fracture. If your injury is severe enough to warrant surgical treatment, the surgeon should address both your bone and cartilage injuries.
The pain associated with a broken rib usually occurs or worsens when you: Take a deep breath, Press on the injured area, Bend or twist your body.
See your doctor if you have a very tender spot in your rib area that occurs after trauma or if you have difficulty breathing or pain with deep breathing.
Seek medical attention immediately if you feel pressure, fullness or a squeezing pain in the center of your chest that lasts for more than a few minutes or pain that extends beyond your chest to your shoulder or arm. These symptoms can indicate a heart attack.
Broken ribs are most commonly caused by direct impacts — such as those from motor vehicle accidents, falls, child abuse or contact sports. Ribs also can be fractured by repetitive trauma from sports like golf and rowing or from severe and prolonged coughing.
The following factors can increase your risk of breaking a rib:
Osteoporosis. Having this disease in which your bones lose their density makes you more susceptible to a bone fracture.
Sports participation. Playing contact sports, such as hockey or football, increases your risk of trauma to your chest.
Cancerous lesion in a rib. A cancerous lesion can weaken the bone, making it more susceptible to breaks.
A broken rib can injure blood vessels and internal organs. The risk increases with the number of broken ribs. Complications vary depending on which ribs break. Possible complications include:
Torn or punctured aorta. A sharp end of a break in one of the first three ribs at the top of your rib cage could rupture your aorta or another major blood vessel.
Punctured lung. The jagged end of a broken middle rib can puncture a lung and cause it to collapse.
Lacerated spleen, liver or kidneys. The bottom two ribs rarely fracture because they have more flexibility than do the upper and middle ribs, which are anchored to the breastbone. But if you break a lower rib, the broken ends can cause serious damage to your spleen, liver or a kidney.
Signs and symptoms of a broken toe include: Pain, Swelling, Discoloration.
Consult a doctor if the pain, swelling and discoloration continue for more than a few days or if the injury interferes with walking or wearing shoes.
A broken toe typically happens when you drop something heavy on your foot or you stub your toe against something hard.
Complications may include:
Infection. If the skin is cut near your injured toe, you are at higher risk of developing an infection in the bone.
Osteoarthritis. This wear-and-tear type of arthritis is more likely to occur when the fracture extends into one of the toe joints.
A broken wrist might cause these signs and symptoms: Severe pain that might worsen when gripping or squeezing or moving your hand or wrist, Swelling, Tenderness, Bruising, Obvious deformity, such as a bent wrist.
If you think you might have a broken wrist, see a doctor immediately, especially if you have numbness, swelling or trouble moving your fingers. A delay in diagnosis and treatment can lead to poor healing, decreased range of motion and decreased grip strength.
A broken wrist can be caused by:
Falls. Falling onto an outstretched hand is one of the most common causes of a broken wrist.
Sports injuries. Many wrist fractures occur during contact sports or sports in which you might fall onto an outstretched hand — such as in-line skating or snowboarding.
Motor vehicle crashes. Motor vehicle crashes can cause wrist bones to break, sometimes into many pieces, and often require surgical repair.
Participating in certain sports activities and having the bone-thinning disease osteoporosis can increase your chances of breaking a wrist.
Contact sports and activities that increase your risk of falling can increase your risk of breaking bones in your wrist. Examples include: Football or soccer, especially on artificial turf, Rugby, Horseback riding, Hockey, Skiing, Snowboarding, In-line skating, Jumping on a trampoline.
Complications of a broken wrist are rare, but they might include:
Ongoing stiffness, aching or disability. Stiffness, pain or aching in the affected area generally goes away eventually after your cast is removed or after surgery. However, some people have permanent stiffness or pain. Be patient with your recovery, and talk to your doctor about exercises that might help or for a referral to physical or occupational therapy.
Osteoarthritis. Fractures that extend into a joint can cause arthritis years later. If your wrist starts to hurt or swell long after a break, see your doctor for an evaluation.
Nerve or blood vessel damage. Trauma to the wrist can injure adjacent nerves and blood vessels. Seek immediate attention if you have numbness or circulation problems.
For the first few days, the signs and symptoms of bronchiolitis are similar to those of a cold: Runny nose, Stuffy nose, Cough, Slight fever (not always present).
After this, there may be a week or more of difficulty breathing or a whistling noise when the child breathes out (wheezing).
Many infants also have an ear infection (otitis media).
If it's difficult to get your child to eat or drink and his or her breathing becomes more rapid or labored, call your child's doctor. This is especially important if your child is younger than 12 weeks old or has other risk factors for bronchiolitis — including premature birth or a heart or lung condition.
The following signs and symptoms are reasons to seek prompt medical attention: Audible wheezing sounds, Breathing very fast — more than 60 breaths a minute (tachypnea) — and shallowly, Labored breathing — the ribs seem to suck inward when the infant inhales, Sluggish or lethargic appearance, Refusal to drink enough, or breathing too fast to eat or drink, Skin turning blue, especially the lips and fingernails (cyanosis).
Bronchiolitis occurs when a virus infects the bronchioles, which are the smallest airways in your lungs. The infection makes the bronchioles swell and become inflamed. Mucus collects in these airways, which makes it difficult for air to flow freely in and out of the lungs.
Most cases of bronchiolitis are caused by the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). RSV is a common virus that infects just about every child by 2 years of age. Outbreaks of RSV infection occur every winter, and individuals can be reinfected, as previous infection does not appear to cause lasting immunity. Bronchiolitis also can be caused by other viruses, including those that cause the flu or the common cold.
The viruses that cause bronchiolitis are easily spread. You can contract them through droplets in the air when someone who is sick coughs, sneezes or talks. You can also get them by touching shared objects — such as utensils, towels or toys — and then touching your eyes, nose or mouth.
Bronchiolitis typically affects children under the age of 2 years. Infants younger than 3 months of age are at greatest risk of getting bronchiolitis because their lungs and immune systems aren't yet fully developed.
Other factors that are linked with an increased risk of bronchiolitis in infants and with more-severe cases include: Premature birth, Underlying heart or lung condition, Depressed immune system, Exposure to tobacco smoke, Never having been breast-fed (breast-fed babies receive immune benefits from the mother), Contact with multiple children, such as in a child care setting, Spending time in crowded environments, Having siblings who attend school or get child care services and bring home the infection.
Complications of severe bronchiolitis may include: Blue lips or skin (cyanosis), caused by lack of oxygen, Pauses in breathing (apnea), which is most likely to occur in premature babies and in babies within the first two months of life, Dehydration, Low oxygen levels and respiratory failure.
If these occur, your child may need to be in the hospital. Severe respiratory failure may require that a tube be inserted into the windpipe (trachea) to help the child's breathing until the infection has run its course.
If your baby was born prematurely, has a heart or lung condition, or has a depressed immune system, watch closely for beginning signs of bronchiolitis. The infection can quickly become severe. In such cases, your child will usually need hospitalization.
For either acute bronchitis or chronic bronchitis, signs and symptoms may include: Cough, Production of mucus (sputum), which can be clear, white, yellowish-gray or green in color — rarely, it may be streaked with blood, Fatigue, Shortness of breath, Slight fever and chills, Chest discomfort.
If you have acute bronchitis, you might have cold symptoms, such as a mild headache or body aches. While these symptoms usually improve in about a week, you may have a nagging cough that lingers for several weeks.
Chronic bronchitis is defined as a productive cough that lasts at least three months, with recurring bouts occurring for at least two consecutive years.
If you have chronic bronchitis, you're likely to have periods when your cough or other symptoms worsen. At those times, you may have an acute infection on top of chronic bronchitis.
See your doctor if your cough: Lasts more than three weeks, Prevents you from sleeping, Is accompanied by fever higher than 100.4 F (38 C), Produces discolored mucus, Produces blood, Is associated with wheezing or shortness of breath.
Acute bronchitis is usually caused by viruses, typically the same viruses that cause colds and flu (influenza). Antibiotics don't kill viruses, so this type of medication isn't useful in most cases of bronchitis.
The most common cause of chronic bronchitis is cigarette smoking. Air pollution and dust or toxic gases in the environment or workplace also can contribute to the condition.
Factors that increase your risk of bronchitis include:
Cigarette smoke. People who smoke or who live with a smoker are at higher risk of both acute bronchitis and chronic bronchitis.
Low resistance. This may result from another acute illness, such as a cold, or from a chronic condition that compromises your immune system. Older adults, infants and young children have greater vulnerability to infection.
Exposure to irritants on the job. Your risk of developing bronchitis is greater if you work around certain lung irritants, such as grains or textiles, or are exposed to chemical fumes.
Gastric reflux. Repeated bouts of severe heartburn can irritate your throat and make you more prone to developing bronchitis.
Although a single episode of bronchitis usually isn't cause for concern, it can lead to pneumonia in some people. Repeated bouts of bronchitis, however, may mean that you have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Symptoms of brucellosis may show up anytime from a few days to a few months after you've been infected. Signs and symptoms are similar to those of the flu and include: Fever, Chills, Loss of appetite, Sweats, Weakness, Fatigue, Joint, muscle and back pain, Headache.
Brucellosis symptoms may disappear for weeks or months and then return. Some people have chronic brucellosis and experience symptoms for years, even after treatment. Long-term signs and symptoms may include fatigue, recurrent fevers, arthritis, inflammation of the heart (endocarditis) and spondylitis — an inflammatory arthritis that affects the spine and nearby joints.
Brucellosis can be hard to identify, especially in the early stages, when it often resembles other conditions, such as the flu. See your doctor if you develop a rapidly rising fever, muscle aches or unusual weakness and have any risk factors for the disease, or if you have a persistent fever.
Many people with Brugada syndrome don't know they have the condition. Brugada syndrome often doesn't cause any noticeable symptoms.
Signs and symptoms that may be associated with Brugada syndrome include: Dizziness, Fainting, Gasping, labored breathing, particularly at night, Irregular heartbeats or palpitations, Extremely fast and chaotic heartbeat, Seizures.
A major sign of Brugada syndrome is an abnormal result on an electrocardiogram (ECG), a test that measures the electrical activity of the heart.
Brugada syndrome signs and symptoms are similar to some other heart rhythm problems. It's important that you see your doctor to find out if Brugada syndrome or another heart rhythm problem is causing your symptoms.
If you faint and you think it may be because of a heart condition, seek emergency medical attention.
If your parent, sibling or child has been diagnosed with Brugada syndrome, you may want to ask your doctor if you should have testing to see if you're at risk of Brugada syndrome.
Brugada syndrome is a heart rhythm disorder. Each beat of your heart is triggered by an electrical impulse generated by special cells in the right upper chamber of your heart. Tiny pores, called channels, on each of these cells direct this electrical activity, which makes your heart beat.
In Brugada syndrome, a defect in these channels causes your heart to beat abnormally fast, creating a dangerous heart rhythm (ventricular fibrillation).
As a result, your heart doesn't pump enough blood to the rest of your body. You can faint if the abnormal rhythm lasts for a short time. Sudden cardiac death can occur if the abnormal heart beat doesn't stop.
Brugada syndrome may be caused by: Structural abnormality in your heart, which may be hard to detect, An imbalance in chemicals that help send electrical signals through your body (electrolytes), Use of certain prescription medications or cocaine.
Risk factors for Brugada syndrome include:
Family history of Brugada syndrome. This condition is often passed down through families (inherited). If other family members have had Brugada syndrome, you're at an increased risk of having it, too.
Being male. Men are more frequently diagnosed with Brugada syndrome than are women.
Race. Brugada syndrome occurs more frequently in Asians than in other races.
Fever. A fever doesn't cause Brugada syndrome, but it can irritate the heart and trigger fainting or sudden cardiac arrest in someone with Brugada syndrome, especially in children.
Complications of Brugada syndrome require emergency medical care. They include:
Sudden cardiac arrest. If not treated immediately, this sudden loss of heart function, breathing and consciousness, which often occurs while sleeping, is fatal. With fast, appropriate medical care, survival is possible.
Fainting. If you have Brugada syndrome and you faint, get emergency medical attention.
Signs and symptoms of bruxism may include: Teeth grinding or clenching, which may be loud enough to wake up your sleep partner, Teeth that are flattened, fractured, chipped or loose, Worn tooth enamel, exposing deeper layers of your tooth, Increased tooth pain or sensitivity, Tired or tight jaw muscles, or a locked jaw that won't open or close completely, Jaw, neck or face pain or soreness, Pain that feels like an earache, though it's actually not a problem with your ear, Dull headache starting in the temples, Damage from chewing on the inside of your cheek, Sleep disruption.
See your dentist or doctor if you have any of the symptoms listed above or have other concerns about your teeth or jaw.
If you notice that your child is grinding his or her teeth — or has other signs or symptoms of bruxism — be sure to mention it at your child's next dental appointment.
Doctors don't completely understand what causes bruxism, but it may be due to a combination of physical, psychological and genetic factors.
Awake bruxism may be due to emotions such as anxiety, stress, anger, frustration or tension. Or it may be a coping strategy or a habit during deep concentration.
Sleep bruxism may be a sleep-related chewing activity associated with arousals during sleep.
These factors increase your risk of bruxism:
Stress. Increased anxiety or stress can lead to teeth grinding. So can anger and frustration.
Age. Bruxism is common in young children, but it usually goes away by adulthood.
Personality type. Having a personality type that's aggressive, competitive or hyperactive can increase your risk of bruxism.
Medications and other substances. Bruxism may be an uncommon side effect of some psychiatric medications, such as certain antidepressants. Smoking tobacco, drinking caffeinated beverages or alcohol, or using recreational drugs may increase the risk of bruxism.
Family members with bruxism. Sleep bruxism tends to occur in families. If you have bruxism, other members of your family also may have bruxism or a history of it.
Other disorders. Bruxism can be associated with some mental health and medical disorders, such as Parkinson's disease, dementia, gastroesophageal reflux disorder (GERD), epilepsy, night terrors, sleep-related disorders such as sleep apnea, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
In most cases, bruxism doesn't cause serious complications. But severe bruxism may lead to: Damage to your teeth, restorations, crowns or jaw, Tension-type headaches, Severe facial or jaw pain, Disorders that occur in the temporomandibular joints (TMJs), located just in front of your ears, which may sound like clicking when you open and close your mouth.
Buerger's disease symptoms include:
Tingling or numbness in the hands or feet.
Pale, reddish or blue-tinted hands or feet.
Pain that may come and go in your legs and feet or in your arms and hands. This pain may occur when you use your hands or feet and eases when you stop that activity (claudication), or when you're at rest.
Inflammation along a vein just below the skin's surface (due to a blood clot in the vein).
Fingers and toes that turn pale when exposed to cold (Raynaud's phenomenon).
Painful open sores on your fingers and toes.
See your doctor if you think you may have signs or symptoms of Buerger's disease.
The exact cause of Buerger's disease is unknown. While tobacco use clearly plays a role in the development of Buerger's disease, it's not clear how it does so. It's thought that chemicals in tobacco may irritate the lining of your blood vessels, causing them to swell.
Experts suspect that some people may have a genetic predisposition to the disease. It's also possible that the disease is caused by an autoimmune response in which the body's immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue.
Cigarette smoking greatly increases your risk of Buerger's disease. But Buerger's disease can occur in people who use any form of tobacco, including cigars and chewing tobacco.
People who smoke hand-rolled cigarettes using raw tobacco and those who smoke more than a pack and half of cigarettes a day may have the greatest risk of Buerger's disease. The rates of Buerger's disease are highest in areas of the Mediterranean, Middle East and Asia where heavy smoking is most common.
Long-term infection of the gums has been linked to the development of Buerger's disease, though the reason for this connection isn't yet clear.
Buerger's disease is far more common in males than in females. However, this difference may be linked to higher rates of smoking in men.
The disease often first appears in people less than 45 years old.
If Buerger's disease worsens, blood flow to your arms and legs decreases. This is due to blockages that make it hard for blood to reach the tips of your fingers and toes. Tissues that don't receive blood don't get the oxygen and nutrients they need to survive.
This can cause the skin and tissue on the ends of your fingers and toes to die (gangrene). Signs and symptoms of gangrene include black or blue skin, a loss of feeling in the affected finger or toe, and a foul smell from the affected area. Gangrene is a serious condition that usually requires amputation of the affected finger or toe.
Bulimia signs and symptoms may include: Being preoccupied with your body shape and weight, Living in fear of gaining weight, Repeated episodes of eating abnormally large amounts of food in one sitting, Feeling a loss of control during bingeing — like you can't stop eating or can't control what you eat, Forcing yourself to vomit or exercising too much to keep from gaining weight after bingeing, Using laxatives, diuretics or enemas after eating when they're not needed, Fasting, restricting calories or avoiding certain foods between binges, Using dietary supplements or herbal products excessively for weight loss.
The severity of bulimia is determined by the number of times a week that you purge, usually at least once a week for at least three months.
If you have any bulimia symptoms, seek medical help as soon as possible. If left untreated, bulimia can severely impact your health.
Talk to your primary care provider or a mental health professional about your bulimia symptoms and feelings. If you're reluctant to seek treatment, confide in someone about what you're going through, whether it's a friend or loved one, a teacher, a faith leader, or someone else you trust. He or she can help you take the first steps to get successful bulimia treatment.
If you think a loved one may have symptoms of bulimia, have an open and honest discussion about your concerns. You can't force someone to seek professional care, but you can offer encouragement and support. You can also help find a qualified doctor or mental health professional, make an appointment, and even offer to go along.
Because most people with bulimia are usually normal weight or slightly overweight, it may not be apparent to others that something is wrong. Red flags that family and friends may notice include: Constantly worrying or complaining about being fat, Having a distorted, excessively negative body image, Repeatedly eating unusually large quantities of food in one sitting, especially foods the person would normally avoid, Strict dieting or fasting after binge eating, Not wanting to eat in public or in front of others, Going to the bathroom right after eating, during meals or for long periods of time, Exercising too much, Having sores, scars or calluses on the knuckles or hands, Having damaged teeth and gums, Changing weight, Swelling in the hands and feet, Facial and cheek swelling from enlarged glands.
The exact cause of bulimia is unknown. Many factors could play a role in the development of eating disorders, including genetics, biology, emotional health, societal expectations and other issues.
Girls and women are more likely to have bulimia than boys and men are. Bulimia often begins in the late teens or early adulthood.
Factors that increase your risk of bulimia may include:
Biology. People with first-degree relatives (siblings, parents or children) with an eating disorder may be more likely to develop an eating disorder, suggesting a possible genetic link. Being overweight as a child or teen may increase the risk.
Psychological and emotional issues. Psychological and emotional problems, such as depression, anxiety disorders or substance use disorders are closely linked with eating disorders. People with bulimia may feel negatively about themselves. In some cases, traumatic events and environmental stress may be contributing factors.
Dieting. People who diet are at higher risk of developing eating disorders. Many people with bulimia severely restrict calories between binge episodes, which may trigger an urge to again binge eat and then purge. Other triggers for bingeing can include stress, poor body self-image, food and boredom.
Bulimia may cause numerous serious and even life-threatening complications. Possible complications include: Negative self-esteem and problems with relationships and social functioning, Dehydration, which can lead to major medical problems, such as kidney failure, Heart problems, such as an irregular heartbeat or heart failure, Severe tooth decay and gum disease, Absent or irregular periods in females, Digestive problems, Anxiety, depression, personality disorders or bipolar disorder, Misuse of alcohol or drugs, Self-injury, suicidal thoughts or suicide.
The signs and symptoms of bullous pemphigoid may include: Itching skin, weeks or months before blisters form, Large blisters that don't easily rupture when touched, often along creases or folds in the skin, Skin around the blisters that is normal, reddish or darker than normal, Eczema or a hive-like rash, Small blisters or sores in the mouth or other mucous membranes (benign mucous membrane pemphigoid).
See your doctor if you develop: Unexplained blistering, Blisters on your eyes, Signs of infection.
The blisters occur because of a malfunction in your immune system.
Your body's immune system normally produces antibodies to fight bacteria, viruses or other potentially harmful foreign substances. For reasons that are not clear, the body may develop an antibody to a particular tissue in your body.
In bullous pemphigoid, the immune system produces antibodies to the fibers that connect the outer layer of skin (epidermis) and the next layer of skin (dermis). These antibodies trigger inflammation that produces the blisters and itching of bullous pemphigoid.
Bullous pemphigoid usually appears randomly with no clear factors contributing to the onset of disease. Some cases may be triggered by:
Medications. Prescription drugs that may cause bullous pemphigoid include etanercept (Enbrel), sulfasalazine (Azulfidine), furosemide (Lasix) and penicillin.
Light and radiation. Ultraviolet light therapy to treat certain skin conditions may trigger bullous pemphigoid, as can radiation therapy to treat cancer.
Medical conditions. Disorders that may trigger bullous pemphigoid include psoriasis, lichen planus, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis and multiple sclerosis.
Bullous pemphigoid most commonly occurs in older adults, and the risk increases with age.
In most people, bundle branch block doesn't cause symptoms. Some people with the condition don't know they have bundle branch block.
Rarely, signs and symptoms may include fainting (syncope) or feeling as if you're going to faint (presyncope).
If you've fainted, see your doctor to rule out serious causes.
If you have heart disease or have been diagnosed with bundle branch block, ask your doctor how often you should have follow-up visits.
Normally, electrical impulses within the heart muscle cause it to beat (contract). These impulses travel along a pathway, including two branches called the right and the left bundles. If one or both of these branch bundles are damaged — due to a heart attack, for example —the electrical impulses can become blocked, and your heart will beat abnormally.
The cause for bundle branch blocks can differ depending on whether the left or the right bundle branch is affected. Sometimes, there is no known cause.
Causes can include: Heart attack (myocardial infarction), High blood pressure (hypertension), Infection of the heart muscle by bacteria or virus (myocarditis), Thickened, stiffened or weakened heart muscle (cardiomyopathy).
Blood clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism), Heart attack (myocardial infarction), Heart defects that are present at birth (congenital) — such as a hole in the wall separating the upper chambers of the heart (atrial septal defect), High blood pressure in the pulmonary arteries (pulmonary hypertension), Infection of the heart muscle by bacteria or virus (myocarditis).
Risk factors for bundle branch block include:
Increasing age. Bundle branch block is more common in older adults than in younger people.
Underlying health problems. Having high blood pressure or heart disease increases your risk of having bundle branch block.
If both the right and the left bundles are blocked, the main complication is a complete blockage of the electric signaling from the upper to the lower chambers of the heart. The lack of signaling can slow your heart rate, leading to fainting, abnormal heart rhythms and other serious complications.
Because bundle branch block affects the electrical activity of your heart, it can sometimes complicate the accurate diagnosis of other heart conditions, especially heart attacks, and lead to delays in proper management of those problems.
The signs and symptoms of a bunion include: A bulging bump on the outside of the base of your big toe, Swelling, redness or soreness around your big toe joint, Corns or calluses — these often develop where the first and second toes rub against each other, Ongoing pain or pain that comes and goes, Limited movement of your big toe.
Although bunions often require no medical treatment, see your doctor or a doctor who specializes in treating foot disorders (podiatrist or orthopedic foot specialist) if you have: Ongoing big toe or foot pain, A visible bump on your big toe joint, Decreased movement of your big toe or foot, Difficulty finding shoes that fit properly because of a bunion.
There are many theories about how bunions develop, but the exact cause is unknown. Factors likely include: Inherited foot type, Foot stress or injuries, Deformities present at birth.
Experts disagree on whether tight, high-heeled or too-narrow shoes cause bunions or whether footwear simply contributes to the development of bunions.
Bunions might be associated with certain types of arthritis, particularly inflammatory types, such as rheumatoid arthritis.
These factors might increase your risk of bunions:
High heels. Wearing high heels forces your toes into the front of your shoes, often crowding your toes.
Ill-fitting shoes. People who wear shoes that are too tight, too narrow or too pointed are more likely to develop bunions.
Rheumatoid arthritis. Having this inflammatory condition can make you more likely to develop bunions.
Heredity. The tendency to develop bunions might be the result of an inherited problem with the structure or anatomy of your foot.
Possible complications of bunions include:
Bursitis. This painful condition occurs when the small fluid-filled pads that cushion the bones near your joints become inflamed.
Hammertoe. An abnormal bend that occurs in the middle joint of a toe, usually the toe next to your big toe, can cause pain and pressure.
Metatarsalgia. This condition causes pain and swelling in the ball of your foot.
Symptoms of burning mouth syndrome may include: A burning or scalding sensation that most commonly affects your tongue, but may also affect your lips, gums, palate, throat or whole mouth, A sensation of dry mouth with increased thirst, Taste changes in your mouth, such as a bitter or metallic taste, Loss of taste, Tingling, stinging or numbness in your mouth.
The discomfort from burning mouth syndrome typically has several different patterns. It may: Occur every day, with little discomfort when you wake, but become worse as the day progresses, Start as soon as you wake up and last all day, Come and go.
Whatever pattern of mouth discomfort you have, burning mouth syndrome may last for months to years. In rare cases, symptoms may suddenly go away on their own or become less frequent. Some sensations may be temporarily relieved during eating or drinking.
Burning mouth syndrome usually doesn't cause any noticeable physical changes to your tongue or mouth.
If you have discomfort, burning or soreness of your tongue, lips, gums or other areas of your mouth, see your doctor or dentist. They may need to work together to help pinpoint a cause and develop an effective treatment plan.
The cause of burning mouth syndrome can be classified as either primary or secondary.
When no clinical or lab abnormalities can be identified, the condition is called primary or idiopathic burning mouth syndrome. Some research suggests that primary burning mouth syndrome is related to problems with taste and sensory nerves of the peripheral or central nervous system.
Sometimes burning mouth syndrome is caused by an underlying medical condition. In these cases, it's called secondary burning mouth syndrome.
Underlying problems that may be linked to secondary burning mouth syndrome include: Dry mouth (xerostomia), which can be caused by various medications, health problems, problems with salivary gland function or the side effects of cancer treatment, Other oral conditions, such as a fungal infection of the mouth (oral thrush), an inflammatory condition called oral lichen planus or a condition called geographic tongue that gives the tongue a maplike appearance, Nutritional deficiencies, such as a lack of iron, zinc, folate (vitamin B-9), thiamin (vitamin B-1), riboflavin (vitamin B-2), pyridoxine (vitamin B-6) and cobalamin (vitamin B-12), Allergies or reactions to foods, food flavorings, other food additives, fragrances, dyes or dental-work substances, Reflux of stomach acid (gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD) that enters your mouth from your stomach, Certain medications, particularly high blood pressure medications, Oral habits, such as tongue thrusting, biting the tip of the tongue and teeth grinding (bruxism), Endocrine disorders, such as diabetes or underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), Excessive mouth irritation, which may result from overbrushing your tongue, using abrasive toothpastes, overusing mouthwashes or having too many acidic drinks, Psychological factors, such as anxiety, depression or stress.
Wearing dentures, even if they don't fit well and cause irritation, doesn't generally cause burning mouth syndrome, but dentures can make symptoms worse.
Burning mouth syndrome is uncommon. However, your risk may be greater if: You're a woman, You're perimenopausal or postmenopausal, You're over the age of 50.
Burning mouth syndrome usually begins spontaneously, with no known triggering factor. However, certain factors may increase your risk of developing burning mouth syndrome, including: Recent illness, Some chronic medical disorders such as fibromyalgia, Parkinson's disease, autoimmune disorders and neuropathy, Previous dental procedures, Allergic reactions to food, Medications, Traumatic life events, Stress, Anxiety, Depression.
Complications that burning mouth syndrome may cause or be associated with are mainly related to discomfort. They include, for example: Difficulty falling asleep, Difficulty eating, Depression, Anxiety.
Burn symptoms vary depending on how deep the skin damage is. It can take a day or two for the signs and symptoms of a severe burn to develop.
1st-degree burn. This minor burn affects only the outer layer of the skin (epidermis). It may cause redness and pain.
2nd-degree burn. This type of burn affects both the epidermis and the second layer of skin (dermis). It may cause swelling and red, white or splotchy skin. Blisters may develop, and pain can be severe. Deep second-degree burns can cause scarring.
3rd-degree burn. This burn reaches to the fat layer beneath the skin. Burned areas may be black, brown or white. The skin may look leathery. Third-degree burns can destroy nerves, causing numbness.
Seek emergency medical assistance for: Burns that cover the hands, feet, face, groin, buttocks, a major joint or a large area of the body, Deep burns, which means burns affecting all layers of the skin or even deeper tissues, Burns that cause the skin to look leathery, Burns that appear charred or have patches of black, brown or white, Burns caused by chemicals or electricity, Difficulty breathing or burns to the airway.
Take first-aid measures while waiting for emergency assistance.
Call your doctor if you experience: Signs of infection, such as oozing from the wound, increased pain, redness and swelling, A burn or blister that's large or doesn't heal in two weeks, New, unexplained symptoms, Significant scarring.
Burns are caused by: Fire, Hot liquid or steam, Hot metal, glass or other objects, Electrical currents, Radiation, such as that from X-rays, Sunlight or other sources of ultraviolet radiation, such as a tanning bed, Chemicals such as strong acids, lye, paint thinner or gasoline, Abuse.
Complications of deep or widespread burns can include: Bacterial infection, which may lead to a bloodstream infection (sepsis), Fluid loss, including low blood volume (hypovolemia), Dangerously low body temperature (hypothermia), Breathing problems from the intake of hot air or smoke, Scars or ridged areas caused by an overgrowth of scar tissue (keloids), Bone and joint problems, such as when scar tissue causes the shortening and tightening of skin, muscles or tendons (contractures).
If you have bursitis, the affected joint might: Feel achy or stiff, Hurt more when you move it or press on it, Look swollen and red.
Consult your doctor if you have: Disabling joint pain, Sudden inability to move a joint, Excessive swelling, redness, bruising or a rash in the affected area, Sharp or shooting pain, especially when you exercise or exert yourself, A fever.
The most common causes of bursitis are repetitive motions or positions that put pressure on the bursae around a joint. Examples include: Throwing a baseball or lifting something over your head repeatedly, Leaning on your elbows for long periods, Extensive kneeling for tasks such as laying carpet or scrubbing floors.
Other causes include injury or trauma to the affected area, inflammatory arthritis such as rheumatoid arthritis, gout and infection.
Anyone can develop bursitis, but certain factors can increase your risk:
Age. Bursitis becomes more common with aging.
Occupations or hobbies. If your work or hobby requires repetitive motion or pressure on particular bursae, your risk of developing bursitis increases. Examples include carpet laying, tile setting, gardening, painting and playing a musical instrument.
Other medical conditions. Certain systemic diseases and conditions — such as rheumatoid arthritis, gout and diabetes — increase your risk of developing bursitis. Being overweight can increase your risk of developing hip and knee bursitis.
Some people carry the bacterium C. difficile in their intestines but never become sick, though rarely may still spread the infection. Signs and symptoms usually develop within five to 10 days after starting a course of antibiotics, but may occur as soon as the first day or up to two months later.
The most common signs and symptoms of mild to moderate C. difficile infection are: Watery diarrhea three or more times a day for two or more days, Mild abdominal cramping and tenderness.
People who have a severe C. difficile infection tend to become dehydrated and may need to be hospitalized. C. difficile can cause the colon to become inflamed and sometimes form patches of raw tissue that can bleed or produce pus. Signs and symptoms of severe infection include: Watery diarrhea 10 to 15 times a day, Abdominal cramping and pain, which may be severe, Rapid heart rate, Fever, Blood or pus in the stool, Nausea, Dehydration, Loss of appetite, Weight loss, Swollen abdomen, Kidney failure, Increased white blood cell count.
Severe C. difficile infection may also cause severe intestinal inflammation, enlargement of the colon (also called toxic megacolon) and sepsis. People who have these conditions are often admitted to the intensive care unit.
Some people have loose stools during or shortly after antibiotic therapy. This may be caused by C. difficile infection. See your doctor if you have: Three or more watery stools a day, Symptoms lasting more than two days, A new fever, Severe abdominal pain or cramping, Blood in your stool.
C. difficile bacteria are found throughout the environment — in soil, air, water, human and animal feces, and food products, such as processed meats. A small number of healthy people naturally carry the bacteria in their large intestines and don't have ill effects from the infection.
Spores from C. difficile bacteria are passed in feces and spread to food, surfaces and objects when people who are infected don't wash their hands thoroughly. These spores can persist in a room for weeks or months. If you touch a surface contaminated with C. difficile spores, you may then unknowingly swallow the bacteria.
Once established, C. difficile can produce toxins that attack the lining of the intestine. The toxins destroy cells, produce patches (plaques) of inflammatory cells and decaying cellular debris inside the colon, and cause watery diarrhea.
An aggressive strain of C. difficile has emerged that produces far more toxins than other strains do. The new strain may be more resistant to certain medications and has shown up in people who haven't been in the hospital or taken antibiotics. This strain of C. difficile has caused several outbreaks of illness since 2000.
Although people who have no known risk factors have gotten sick from C. difficile, certain factors increase the risk.
Your intestines contain about 100 trillion bacterial cells and up to 2,000 different kinds of bacteria, many of which help protect your body from infection. When you take an antibiotic to treat an infection, these drugs tend to destroy some of the normal, helpful bacteria in addition to the bacteria causing the infection. Without enough healthy bacteria to keep it in check, C. difficile can quickly grow out of control. The antibiotics that most often lead to C. difficile infections include: Fluoroquinolones, Cephalosporins, Penicillins, Clindamycin.
Proton pump inhibitors, a type of medicine used to reduce stomach acid, also may increase your risk of C. difficile infection.
The majority of C. difficile infections occur in people who are or who have recently been in a health care setting — including hospitals, nursing homes and long-term care facilities — where germs spread easily, antibiotic use is common and people are especially vulnerable to infection. In hospitals and nursing homes, C. difficile spreads mainly on hands from person to person, but also on cart handles, bedrails, bedside tables, toilets, sinks, stethoscopes, thermometers — and even telephones and remote controls.
If you have a serious illness, such as inflammatory bowel disease or colorectal cancer, or a weakened immune system as a result of a medical condition or treatment (such as chemotherapy), you're more susceptible to a C. difficile infection. Your risk of C. difficile infection is also greater if you've had abdominal surgery or a gastrointestinal procedure.
Women are more likely than men to have C. difficile infection.
Older age is a risk factor. In one study, the risk of becoming infected with C. difficile was 10 times greater for people age 65 and older compared with younger people.
Having one C. difficile infection increases your chance of having another one, and the risk continues to increase with each infection.
Complications of C. difficile infections include:
Dehydration. Severe diarrhea can lead to a significant loss of fluids and electrolytes. This makes it difficult for your body to function normally and can cause blood pressure to drop to dangerously low levels.
Kidney failure. In some cases, dehydration can occur so quickly that kidney function rapidly deteriorates (kidney failure).
Toxic megacolon. In this rare condition, your colon is unable to expel gas and stool, causing it to become greatly distended (megacolon). Left untreated, your colon may rupture, causing bacteria from the colon to enter your abdominal cavity. An enlarged or ruptured colon requires emergency surgery and may be fatal.
A hole in your large intestine (bowel perforation). This is rare and results from extensive damage to the lining of your large intestine or after toxic megacolon. A perforated bowel can spill bacteria from the intestine into your abdominal cavity, leading to a life-threatening infection (peritonitis).
Death. Even mild to moderate C. difficile infections can quickly progress to fatal disease if not treated promptly.
Signs and symptoms of calciphylaxis include: Large purple net-like patterns on skin, Deep, very painful lumps that ulcerate creating open sores with black-brown crust that fails to heal — typically in skin areas with high fat content, such as the stomach and thigh, although they can occur anywhere, Infections from wounds that don't heal.
The exact cause of calciphylaxis is unknown, but recent studies have revealed that most people with the condition have abnormalities in blood-clotting factors. Blood-clotting factors are substances in your blood that help stop bleeding. These abnormalities can lead to small blood clots forming more often than they normally would.
In addition, people with calciphylaxis have an imbalance in the metabolism of calcium. This causes calcium to be deposited in the smallest parts of the arteries (arterioles), which eventually leads to the formation of blood clots in the arterioles. Blood clots can cause fat tissues and skin to be deprived of oxygen and nourishment.
Calciphylaxis most commonly affects people who have end-stage kidney failure. Possible risk factors include: Being female, Obesity, Diabetes, Abnormalities in blood-clotting factors, Long-term dialysis and sometimes kidney transplantation, An imbalance of calcium, phosphorus and aluminum in the body, Some medications, such as warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven), calcium-binding agents or corticosteroids, An overproduction of parathyroid hormone (PTH), which regulates the level of calcium and phosphorus in the body — a condition known as hyperparathyroidism, Uremia, a toxic condition in which substances normally eliminated in the urine — such as calcium and phosphorus — build up in the body.
Signs and symptoms caused by cancer will vary depending on what part of the body is affected.
Some general signs and symptoms associated with, but not specific to, cancer, include: Fatigue, Lump or area of thickening that can be felt under the skin, Weight changes, including unintended loss or gain, Skin changes, such as yellowing, darkening or redness of the skin, sores that won't heal, or changes to existing moles, Changes in bowel or bladder habits, Persistent cough or trouble breathing, Difficulty swallowing, Hoarseness, Persistent indigestion or discomfort after eating, Persistent, unexplained muscle or joint pain, Persistent, unexplained fevers or night sweats, Unexplained bleeding or bruising.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that concern you.
If you don't have any signs or symptoms, but are worried about your risk of cancer, discuss your concerns with your doctor. Ask about which cancer screening tests and procedures are appropriate for you.
Cancer is caused by changes (mutations) to the DNA within cells. The DNA inside a cell is packaged into a large number of individual genes, each of which contains a set of instructions telling the cell what functions to perform, as well as how to grow and divide. Errors in the instructions can cause the cell to stop its normal function and may allow a cell to become cancerous.
A gene mutation can instruct a healthy cell to:
Allow rapid growth. A gene mutation can tell a cell to grow and divide more rapidly. This creates many new cells that all have that same mutation.
Fail to stop uncontrolled cell growth. Normal cells know when to stop growing so that you have just the right number of each type of cell. Cancer cells lose the controls (tumor suppressor genes) that tell them when to stop growing. A mutation in a tumor suppressor gene allows cancer cells to continue growing and accumulating.
Make mistakes when repairing DNA errors. DNA repair genes look for errors in a cell's DNA and make corrections. A mutation in a DNA repair gene may mean that other errors aren't corrected, leading cells to become cancerous.
These mutations are the most common ones found in cancer. But many other gene mutations can contribute to causing cancer.
Gene mutations can occur for several reasons, for instance:
Gene mutations you're born with. You may be born with a genetic mutation that you inherited from your parents. This type of mutation accounts for a small percentage of cancers.
Gene mutations that occur after birth. Most gene mutations occur after you're born and aren't inherited. A number of forces can cause gene mutations, such as smoking, radiation, viruses, cancer-causing chemicals (carcinogens), obesity, hormones, chronic inflammation and a lack of exercise.
Gene mutations occur frequently during normal cell growth. However, cells contain a mechanism that recognizes when a mistake occurs and repairs the mistake. Occasionally, a mistake is missed. This could cause a cell to become cancerous.
The gene mutations you're born with and those that you acquire throughout your life work together to cause cancer.
For instance, if you've inherited a genetic mutation that predisposes you to cancer, that doesn't mean you're certain to get cancer. Instead, you may need one or more other gene mutations to cause cancer. Your inherited gene mutation could make you more likely than other people to develop cancer when exposed to a certain cancer-causing substance.
It's not clear just how many mutations must accumulate for cancer to form. It's likely that this varies among cancer types.
While doctors have an idea of what may increase your risk of cancer, the majority of cancers occur in people who don't have any known risk factors. Factors known to increase your risk of cancer include:
Cancer can take decades to develop. That's why most people diagnosed with cancer are 65 or older. While it's more common in older adults, cancer isn't exclusively an adult disease — cancer can be diagnosed at any age.
Certain lifestyle choices are known to increase your risk of cancer. Smoking, drinking more than one alcoholic drink a day (for women of all ages and men older than age 65) or two drinks a day (for men age 65 and younger), excessive exposure to the sun or frequent blistering sunburns, being obese, and having unsafe sex can contribute to cancer.
You can change these habits to lower your risk of cancer — though some habits are easier to change than others.
Only a small portion of cancers are due to an inherited condition. If cancer is common in your family, it's possible that mutations are being passed from one generation to the next. You might be a candidate for genetic testing to see whether you have inherited mutations that might increase your risk of certain cancers. Keep in mind that having an inherited genetic mutation doesn't necessarily mean you'll get cancer.
Some chronic health conditions, such as ulcerative colitis, can markedly increase your risk of developing certain cancers. Talk to your doctor about your risk.
The environment around you may contain harmful chemicals that can increase your risk of cancer. Even if you don't smoke, you might inhale secondhand smoke if you go where people are smoking or if you live with someone who smokes. Chemicals in your home or workplace, such as asbestos and benzene, also are associated with an increased risk of cancer.
Cancer and its treatment can cause several complications, including:
Pain. Pain can be caused by cancer or by cancer treatment, though not all cancer is painful. Medications and other approaches can effectively treat cancer-related pain.
Fatigue. Fatigue in people with cancer has many causes, but it can often be managed. Fatigue associated with chemotherapy or radiation therapy treatments is common, but it's usually temporary.
Difficulty breathing. Cancer or cancer treatment may cause a feeling of being short of breath. Treatments may bring relief.
Nausea. Certain cancers and cancer treatments can cause nausea. Your doctor can sometimes predict if your treatment is likely to cause nausea. Medications and other treatments may help you prevent or decrease nausea.
Diarrhea or constipation. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect your bowels and cause diarrhea or constipation.
Weight loss. Cancer and cancer treatment may cause weight loss. Cancer steals food from normal cells and deprives them of nutrients. This is often not affected by how many calories or what kind of food is eaten; it's difficult to treat. In most cases, using artificial nutrition through tubes into the stomach or vein does not help change the weight loss.
Chemical changes in your body. Cancer can upset the normal chemical balance in your body and increase your risk of serious complications. Signs and symptoms of chemical imbalances might include excessive thirst, frequent urination, constipation and confusion.
Brain and nervous system problems. Cancer can press on nearby nerves and cause pain and loss of function of one part of your body. Cancer that involves the brain can cause headaches and stroke-like signs and symptoms, such as weakness on one side of your body.
Unusual immune system reactions to cancer. In some cases the body's immune system may react to the presence of cancer by attacking healthy cells. Called paraneoplastic syndrome, these very rare reactions can lead to a variety of signs and symptoms, such as difficulty walking and seizures.
Cancer that spreads. As cancer advances, it may spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body. Where cancer spreads depends on the type of cancer.
Cancer that returns. Cancer survivors have a risk of cancer recurrence. Some cancers are more likely to recur than others. Ask your doctor about what you can do to reduce your risk of cancer recurrence. Your doctor may devise a follow-up care plan for you after treatment. This plan may include periodic scans and exams in the months and years after your treatment, to look for cancer recurrence.
Most canker sores are round or oval with a white or yellow center and a red border. They form inside your mouth — on or under your tongue, inside your cheeks or lips, at the base of your gums, or on your soft palate. You might notice a tingling or burning sensation a day or two before the sores actually appear.
There are several types of canker sores, including minor, major and herpetiform sores.
Minor canker sores are the most common and: Are usually small, Are oval shaped with a red edge, Heal without scarring in one to two weeks.
Major canker sores are less common and: Are larger and deeper than minor canker sores, Are usually round with defined borders, but may have irregular edges when very large, Can be extremely painful, May take up to six weeks to heal and can leave extensive scarring.
Herpetiform canker sores are uncommon and usually develop later in life, but they're not caused by herpes virus infection. These canker sores: Are pinpoint size, Often occur in clusters of 10 to 100 sores, but may merge into one large ulcer, Have irregular edges, Heal without scarring in one to two weeks.
Consult your doctor if you experience: Unusually large canker sores, Recurring sores, with new ones developing before old ones heal, or frequent outbreaks, Persistent sores, lasting two weeks or more, Sores that extend into the lips themselves (vermilion border), Pain that you can't control with self-care measures, Extreme difficulty eating or drinking, High fever along with canker sores.
See your dentist if you have sharp tooth surfaces or dental appliances that seem to trigger the sores.
The precise cause of canker sores remains unclear, though researchers suspect that a combination of factors contributes to outbreaks, even in the same person.
Possible triggers for canker sores include: A minor injury to your mouth from dental work, overzealous brushing, sports mishaps or an accidental cheek bite, Toothpastes and mouth rinses containing sodium lauryl sulfate, Food sensitivities, particularly to chocolate, coffee, strawberries, eggs, nuts, cheese, and spicy or acidic foods, A diet lacking in vitamin B-12, zinc, folate (folic acid) or iron, An allergic response to certain bacteria in your mouth, Helicobacter pylori, the same bacteria that cause peptic ulcers, Hormonal shifts during menstruation, Emotional stress.
Canker sores may also occur because of certain conditions and diseases, such as: Celiac disease, a serious intestinal disorder caused by a sensitivity to gluten, a protein found in most grains, Inflammatory bowel diseases, such as Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, Behcet's disease, a rare disorder that causes inflammation throughout the body, including the mouth, A faulty immune system that attacks healthy cells in your mouth instead of pathogens, such as viruses and bacteria, HIV/AIDS, which suppresses the immune system.
Unlike cold sores, canker sores are not associated with herpes virus infections.
Anyone can develop canker sores. But they occur more often in teens and young adults, and they're more common in females.
Often people with recurrent canker sores have a family history of the disorder. This may be due to heredity or to a shared factor in the environment, such as certain foods or allergens.
Signs and symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning may include: Dull headache, Weakness, Dizziness, Nausea or vomiting, Shortness of breath, Confusion, Blurred vision, Loss of consciousness.
Carbon monoxide poisoning can be particularly dangerous for people who are sleeping or intoxicated. People may have irreversible brain damage or even die before anyone realizes there's a problem.
The warning signs of carbon monoxide poisoning can be subtle. But the condition is a life-threatening medical emergency. If you think you or someone you're with may have carbon monoxide poisoning, get into fresh air and seek emergency medical care.
Carbon monoxide poisoning is caused by inhaling combustion fumes. When too much carbon monoxide is in the air you're breathing, your body replaces the oxygen in your red blood cells with carbon monoxide. This prevents oxygen from reaching your tissues and organs.
Various fuel-burning appliances and engines produce carbon monoxide. The amount of carbon monoxide produced by these sources usually isn't cause for concern. But if they're used in a closed or partially closed space — cooking with a charcoal grill indoors, for example — the carbon monoxide can build to dangerous levels.
Smoke inhalation during a fire also can cause carbon monoxide poisoning.
Exposure to carbon monoxide may be particularly dangerous for:
Unborn babies. Fetal blood cells take up carbon monoxide more readily than adult blood cells do. This makes unborn babies more susceptible to harm from carbon monoxide poisoning.
Children. Young children take breaths more frequently than adults do, which may make them more susceptible to carbon monoxide poisoning.
Older adults. Older people who experience carbon monoxide poisoning may be more likely to develop brain damage.
People who have chronic heart disease. People with a history of anemia and breathing problems also are more likely to get sick from exposure to carbon monoxide.
Those in whom carbon monoxide poisoning leads to unconsciousness. Loss of consciousness indicates more severe exposure.
Depending on the degree and length of exposure, carbon monoxide poisoning can cause: Permanent brain damage, Damage to your heart, possibly leading to life-threatening cardiac complications, Fetal death or miscarriage, Death.
The signs and symptoms of carcinoid syndrome depend on which chemicals the carcinoid tumor secretes into your bloodstream.
The most common signs and symptoms include:
Skin flushing. The skin on your face and upper chest feels hot and changes color — ranging from pink to purple. Flushing episodes may last from a few minutes to a few hours or longer.
Flushing may happen for no obvious reason, though sometimes it can be triggered by stress, exercise or drinking alcohol.
Facial skin lesions. Purplish areas of spiderlike veins may appear on your nose and upper lip.
Diarrhea. Frequent, watery stools sometimes accompanied by abdominal cramps may occur in people who have carcinoid syndrome.
Difficulty breathing. Asthma-like signs and symptoms, such as wheezing and shortness of breath, may occur at the same time you experience skin flushing.
Rapid heartbeat. Periods of a fast heart rate could be a sign of carcinoid syndrome.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have signs and symptoms that concern you.
Carcinoid syndrome is caused by a carcinoid tumor that secretes serotonin or other chemicals into your bloodstream. Carcinoid tumors occur most commonly in the lungs or in the gastrointestinal tract, including your stomach, small intestine, appendix, colon and rectum.
Only a small percentage of carcinoid tumors secrete the chemicals that cause carcinoid syndrome. When these tumors do secrete the chemicals, the liver normally neutralizes the chemicals before they have a chance to travel through your body and cause symptoms.
However, when an advanced tumor spreads (metastasizes) to the liver itself, it may secrete chemicals that aren't neutralized before reaching the bloodstream. Most people who experience carcinoid syndrome have an advanced cancer that has spread to the liver.
Some carcinoid tumors don't have to be advanced to cause carcinoid syndrome. For instance, carcinoid lung tumors that secrete chemicals into the blood do so farther upstream from the liver, which then cannot process and eliminate the chemicals.
Carcinoid tumors in the intestine, on the other hand, secrete the chemicals into blood that must first pass through the liver before reaching the rest of the body. The liver usually neutralizes the chemicals before they can affect the rest of the body.
What causes carcinoid tumors is unclear.
Having carcinoid syndrome can cause the following complications:
Carcinoid heart disease. Some people with carcinoid syndrome develop carcinoid heart disease. Carcinoid syndrome causes a thickening of the heart valves, making it difficult for them to function properly. As a result, the heart valves may leak.
Signs and symptoms of carcinoid heart disease include fatigue and shortness of breath during physical activity. Carcinoid heart disease can eventually lead to heart failure.
Your doctor may recommend medications for your heart. Surgical repair of damaged heart valves may be an option in advanced carcinoid heart disease.
Bowel obstruction. Cancer that spreads to the lymph nodes next to your small intestine can cause narrowing and kinking of your intestine, leading to a bowel obstruction.
Signs and symptoms of a bowel obstruction include severe, cramping abdominal pain and vomiting. Surgery may be necessary to relieve the obstruction.
Carcinoid crisis. Carcinoid crisis causes a severe episode of flushing, low blood pressure, confusion and breathing difficulty.
Carcinoid crisis can occur in people with carcinoid tumors when they are exposed to certain triggers, including anesthetic used during surgery. Carcinoid crisis can be fatal. Your doctor may give you medications before surgery to reduce the risk of carcinoid crisis.
In some cases, carcinoid tumors don't cause any signs or symptoms. When they do occur, signs and symptoms are usually vague and depend on the location of the tumor.
Signs and symptoms of carcinoid lung tumors include: Chest pain, Wheezing, Shortness of breath, Diarrhea, Redness or a feeling of warmth in your face and neck (skin flushing), Weight gain, particularly around the midsection and upper back, Pink or purple marks on the skin that look like stretch marks.
Signs and symptoms of carcinoid tumors in the digestive tract include: Abdominal pain, Diarrhea, Nausea, vomiting and inability to pass stool due to intestinal blockage (bowel obstruction), Rectal bleeding, Rectal pain, Redness or a feeling of warmth in your face and neck (skin flushing).
If you experience any signs and symptoms that bother you and are persistent, make an appointment with your doctor.
It's not clear what causes carcinoid tumors. In general, cancer occurs when a cell develops mutations in its DNA. The mutations allow the cell to continue growing and dividing when healthy cells would normally die.
The accumulating cells form a tumor. Cancer cells can invade nearby healthy tissue and spread to other parts of the body.
Doctors don't know what causes the mutations that can lead to carcinoid tumors. But they know that carcinoid tumors develop in neuroendocrine cells.
Neuroendocrine cells are found in various organs throughout the body. They perform some nerve cell functions and some hormone-producing endocrine cell functions. Some hormones that are produced by neuroendocrine cells are cortisol, histamine, insulin and serotonin.
Factors that increase the risk of carcinoid tumors include:
Older age. Older adults are more likely to be diagnosed with a carcinoid tumor than are younger people or children.
Sex. Women are more likely than men to develop carcinoid tumors.
Family history. A family history of multiple endocrine neoplasia, type I (MEN I), increases the risk of carcinoid tumors. In people with MEN I, multiple tumors occur in glands of the endocrine system.
The cells of carcinoid tumors can secrete hormones and other chemicals, causing a range of complications, including:
Carcinoid syndrome. Carcinoid syndrome causes redness or a feeling of warmth in your face and neck (skin flushing), chronic diarrhea, and difficulty breathing, among other signs and symptoms.
Carcinoid heart disease. Carcinoid tumors may secrete hormones that can cause thickening of the lining of heart chambers, valves and blood vessels. This can lead to leaky heart valves and heart failure that may require valve-replacement surgery. Carcinoid heart disease can usually be controlled with medications.
Cushing syndrome.  A lung carcinoid tumor can produce an excess of a hormone that can cause your body to produce too much of the hormone cortisol.
Signs and symptoms of carcinoma of unknown primary depend on what part of the body is involved. In general, they might include: A lump that can be felt through the skin, Pain, Changes in bowel habits, such as new and persistent constipation or diarrhea, Frequent urination, Cough, Fever, Night sweats, Losing weight without trying.
In general, cancer forms when cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. The DNA contains instructions that tell cells what to do. Certain mutations can cause a cell to multiply uncontrollably and to continue living when normal cells would die. When this happens, the abnormal cells accumulate and form a tumor. The tumor cells can break away and spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.
In carcinoma of unknown primary, the cancer cells that spread to other parts of the body are found. But the original tumor isn't found.
This can happen if: The original cancer is too small to be detected by imaging tests, The original cancer was killed by the body's immune system, The original cancer was removed in an operation for another condition.
The risk of carcinoma of unknown primary might be related to:
Older age. This type of cancer is most likely to occur in people older than 60.
Family history of cancer. There's some evidence that carcinoma of unknown primary might be associated with a family history of cancer that affects the lungs, kidneys or colon.
Cardiogenic shock signs and symptoms include: Rapid breathing, Severe shortness of breath, Sudden, rapid heartbeat (tachycardia), Loss of consciousness, Weak pulse, Low blood pressure (hypotension), Sweating, Pale skin, Cold hands or feet, Urinating less than normal or not at all.
Because cardiogenic shock usually occurs in people who are having a severe heart attack, it's important to know the signs and symptoms of a heart attack. These include: Pressure, fullness or a squeezing pain in the center of your chest that lasts for more than a few minutes, Pain extending to your shoulder, one or both arms, back, or even to your teeth and jaw, Increasing episodes of chest pain, Shortness of breath, Sweating, Lightheadedness or sudden dizziness, Nausea and vomiting.
Seek medical attention quickly when having these signs or symptoms to decrease your risk of developing cardiogenic shock.
Getting heart attack treatment quickly improves your chance of survival and minimizes damage to your heart. If you're having symptoms of a heart attack, call 911 or other emergency medical services for help. If you don't have access to emergency medical services, have someone drive you to the nearest hospital. Don't drive yourself.
In most cases, a lack of oxygen to your heart, usually from a heart attack, damages its main pumping chamber (left ventricle). Without oxygen-rich blood circulating to that area of your heart, the heart muscle can weaken and go into cardiogenic shock.
Rarely, damage to your heart's right ventricle, which sends blood to your lungs to receive oxygen, leads to cardiogenic shock.
Other possible causes of cardiogenic shock include: Inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis), Infection of the heart valves (endocarditis), Weakened heart from any cause, Drug overdoses or poisoning with substances that can affect your heart's pumping ability.
If you have a heart attack, your risk of developing cardiogenic shock increases if you: Are older, Have a history of heart failure or heart attack, Have blockages (coronary artery disease) in several of your heart's main arteries, Have diabetes or high blood pressure, Are female.
If not treated immediately, cardiogenic shock can be fatal. Another serious complication is damage to your liver, kidneys or other organs from lack of oxygen, which can be permanent.
There might be no signs or symptoms in the early stages of cardiomyopathy. But as the condition advances, signs and symptoms usually appear, including: Breathlessness with exertion or even at rest, Swelling of the legs, ankles and feet, Bloating of the abdomen due to fluid buildup, Cough while lying down, Fatigue, Heartbeats that feel rapid, pounding or fluttering, Chest discomfort or pressure, Dizziness, lightheadedness and fainting.
Signs and symptoms tend to get worse unless treated. In some people, the condition worsens quickly; in others, it might not worsen for a long time.
See your doctor if you have one or more signs or symptoms associated with cardiomyopathy. Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have severe difficulty breathing, fainting or chest pain that lasts for more than a few minutes.
Because some types of cardiomyopathy can be hereditary, if you have it your doctor might advise that your family members be checked.
Often the cause of the cardiomyopathy is unknown. In some people, however, it's the result of another condition (acquired) or passed on from a parent (inherited).
Contributing factors for acquired cardiomyopathy include: Long-term high blood pressure, Heart tissue damage from a heart attack, Chronic rapid heart rate, Heart valve problems, Metabolic disorders, such as obesity, thyroid disease or diabetes, Nutritional deficiencies of essential vitamins or minerals, such as thiamin (vitamin B-1), Pregnancy complications, Drinking too much alcohol over many years, Use of cocaine, amphetamines or anabolic steroids, Use of some chemotherapy drugs and radiation to treat cancer, Certain infections, especially those that inflame the heart, Iron buildup in your heart muscle (hemochromatosis), A condition that causes inflammation and can cause lumps of cells to grow in the heart and other organs (sarcoidosis), A disorder that causes the buildup of abnormal proteins (amyloidosis), Connective tissue disorders, Infection with COVID-19.
Types of cardiomyopathy include:
Dilated cardiomyopathy. In this type of cardiomyopathy, the pumping ability of your heart's main pumping chamber — the left ventricle — becomes enlarged (dilated) and can't effectively pump blood out of the heart.
Although this type can affect people of all ages, it occurs most often in middle-aged people and is more likely to affect men. The most common cause is coronary artery disease or heart attack.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This type involves abnormal thickening of your heart muscle, particularly affecting the muscle of your heart's main pumping chamber (left ventricle). The thickened heart muscle can make it harder for the heart to work properly.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can develop at any age, but the condition tends to be more severe if it becomes apparent during childhood. Most affected people have a family history of the disease, and some genetic mutations have been linked to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy. In this type, the heart muscle becomes rigid and less elastic, so it can't expand and fill with blood between heartbeats. This least common type of cardiomyopathy can occur at any age, but it most often affects older people.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy can occur for no known reason (idiopathic), or it can by caused by a disease elsewhere in the body that affects the heart, such as when iron builds up in the heart muscle (hemochromatosis).
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia. In this rare type of cardiomyopathy, the muscle in the lower right heart chamber (right ventricle) is replaced by scar tissue, which can lead to heart rhythm problems. It's often caused by genetic mutations.
Unclassified cardiomyopathy. Other types of cardiomyopathy fall into this category.
There are a number of factors that can increase your risk of cardiomyopathy, including: Family history of cardiomyopathy, heart failure and sudden cardiac arrest, Long-term high blood pressure, Conditions that affect the heart, including a past heart attack, coronary artery disease or an infection in the heart (ischemic cardiomyopathy), Obesity, which makes the heart work harder, Long-term alcohol abuse, Illicit drug use, such as cocaine, amphetamines and anabolic steroids, Certain chemotherapy drugs and radiation therapy for cancer, Certain diseases, such as diabetes, an under- or overactive thyroid gland, or a disorder that causes the body to store excess iron (hemochromatosis), Other conditions that affect the heart, such as a disorder that causes the buildup of abnormal proteins (amyloidosis), a disease that causes inflammation and can cause lumps of cells to grow in the heart and other organs (sarcoidosis), or connective tissue disorders.
Cardiomyopathy can lead to other heart conditions, including:
Heart failure. Your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs. Untreated, heart failure can be life-threatening.
Blood clots. Because your heart can't pump effectively, blood clots might form in your heart. If clots enter your bloodstream, they can block the blood flow to other organs, including your heart and brain.
Valve problems. Because cardiomyopathy causes the heart to enlarge, the heart valves might not close properly. This can lead to a backward flow of blood.
Cardiac arrest and sudden death. Cardiomyopathy can lead to abnormal heart rhythms. These abnormal heart rhythms can result in fainting or, in some cases, sudden death if your heart stops beating effectively.
In its early stages, carotid artery disease often doesn't produce any signs or symptoms. The condition may go unnoticed until it's serious enough to deprive your brain of blood, causing a stroke or TIA.
Signs and symptoms of a stroke or TIA include: Sudden numbness or weakness in the face or limbs, often on only one side of the body, Sudden trouble speaking and understanding, Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes, Sudden dizziness or loss of balance, Sudden, severe headache with no known cause.
Seek emergency care if you experience any signs or symptoms of stroke. Even if they last only a short while and then you feel normal, see a doctor right away. You may have experienced a TIA, an important sign that you're at risk of a full-blown stroke.
Talk to your doctor if you have risk factors for carotid artery disease. Even if you don't have any signs or symptoms, your doctor may recommend aggressive management of your risk factors to protect you from stroke. Seeing a doctor early increases your chances that carotid artery disease will be found and treated before a disabling stroke occurs.
Carotid artery disease is caused by a buildup of plaques in arteries that deliver blood to your brain. Plaques are clumps of cholesterol, calcium, fibrous tissue and other cellular debris that gather at microscopic injury sites within the artery. This process is called atherosclerosis.
Carotid arteries that are clogged with plaques are stiff and narrow. Clogged carotid arteries have trouble delivering oxygen and nutrients to vital brain structures that are responsible for your day-to-day functioning.
Factors that increase your risk of carotid artery disease include:
High blood pressure. Excess pressure on artery walls can weaken them and make them more vulnerable to damage.
Tobacco use. Nicotine can irritate the inner lining of your arteries. Smoking also increases your heart rate and blood pressure.
Diabetes. Diabetes lowers your ability to process fats efficiently, placing you at greater risk of high blood pressure and atherosclerosis.
High blood-fat levels. High levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and high levels of triglycerides, a blood fat, encourage the accumulation of plaques.
Family history. Your risk of carotid artery disease is higher if a relative has atherosclerosis or coronary artery disease.
Age. Arteries become less flexible and more prone to injury with age.
Obesity. Excess weight increases your chances of high blood pressure, atherosclerosis and diabetes.
Sleep apnea. Spells of stopping breathing at night may increase your risk of stroke.
Lack of exercise. It contributes to conditions that damage your arteries, including high blood pressure, diabetes and obesity.
Carotid artery disease causes about 10 to 20 percent of strokes. A stroke is a medical emergency that can leave you with permanent brain damage and muscle weakness. In severe cases, a stroke can be fatal.
Carotid artery disease can lead to stroke through:
Reduced blood flow. A carotid artery may become so narrowed by atherosclerosis that not enough blood is able to reach portions of your brain.
Ruptured plaques. A piece of a plaque may break off and flow to smaller arteries in your brain. The plaque fragment may get stuck in one of these smaller arteries, creating a blockage that cuts off blood supply to part of your brain.
Blood clot blockage. Some plaques are prone to cracking and forming irregular surfaces on the artery wall. Your body reacts as if to an injury and sends blood cells that help the clotting process to the area. The result can be a large clot that blocks or slows blood flow to the brain, causing a stroke.
Carpal tunnel syndrome symptoms usually start gradually and include:
Tingling or numbness. You may notice tingling and numbness in your fingers or hand. Usually the thumb and index, middle or ring fingers are affected, but not your little finger. You might feel a sensation like an electric shock in these fingers.
The sensation may travel from your wrist up your arm. These symptoms often occur while holding a steering wheel, phone or newspaper, or may wake you from sleep.
Many people "shake out" their hands to try to relieve their symptoms. The numb feeling may become constant over time.
Weakness. You may experience weakness in your hand and drop objects. This may be due to the numbness in your hand or weakness of the thumb's pinching muscles, which are also controlled by the median nerve.
See your doctor if you have signs and symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome that interfere with your normal activities and sleep patterns. Permanent nerve and muscle damage can occur without treatment.
Carpal tunnel syndrome is caused by pressure on the median nerve.
The median nerve runs from your forearm through a passageway in your wrist (carpal tunnel) to your hand. It provides sensation to the palm side of your thumb and fingers, except the little finger. It also provides nerve signals to move the muscles around the base of your thumb (motor function).
Anything that squeezes or irritates the median nerve in the carpal tunnel space may lead to carpal tunnel syndrome. A wrist fracture can narrow the carpal tunnel and irritate the nerve, as can the swelling and inflammation caused by rheumatoid arthritis.
Many times, there is no single cause of carpal tunnel syndrome. It may be that a combination of risk factors contributes to the development of the condition.
A number of factors have been associated with carpal tunnel syndrome. Although they may not directly cause carpal tunnel syndrome, they may increase the risk of irritation or damage to the median nerve. These include:
Anatomic factors. A wrist fracture or dislocation, or arthritis that deforms the small bones in the wrist, can alter the space within the carpal tunnel and put pressure on the median nerve. 
People who have smaller carpal tunnels may be more likely to have carpal tunnel syndrome.
Sex. Carpal tunnel syndrome is generally more common in women. This may be because the carpal tunnel area is relatively smaller in women than in men.
Women who have carpal tunnel syndrome may also have smaller carpal tunnels than women who don't have the condition.
Nerve-damaging conditions. Some chronic illnesses, such as diabetes, increase your risk of nerve damage, including damage to your median nerve.
Inflammatory conditions. Rheumatoid arthritis and other conditions that have an inflammatory component can affect the lining around the tendons in your wrist and put pressure on your median nerve.
Medications. Some studies have shown a link between carpal tunnel syndrome and the use of anastrozole (Arimidex), a drug used to treat breast cancer.
Obesity. Being obese is a risk factor for carpal tunnel syndrome.
Body fluid changes. Fluid retention may increase the pressure within your carpal tunnel, irritating the median nerve. This is common during pregnancy and menopause. Carpal tunnel syndrome associated with pregnancy generally gets better on its own after pregnancy.
Other medical conditions. Certain conditions, such as menopause, thyroid disorders, kidney failure and lymphedema, may increase your chances of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Workplace factors. Working with vibrating tools or on an assembly line that requires prolonged or repetitive flexing of the wrist may create harmful pressure on the median nerve or worsen existing nerve damage, especially if the work is done in a cold environment.
However, the scientific evidence is conflicting and these factors haven't been established work as direct causes of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Several studies have evaluated whether there is an association between computer use and carpal tunnel syndrome. Some evidence suggests that it is mouse use, and not the use of a keyboard, that may be the problem. However, there has not been enough quality and consistent evidence to support extensive computer use as a risk factor for carpal tunnel syndrome, although it may cause a different form of hand pain.
Many people with unicentric Castleman disease don't notice any signs or symptoms. The enlarged lymph node may be detected during a physical exam or an imaging test for some unrelated problem.
Some people with unicentric Castleman disease might experience signs and symptoms more common to multicentric Castleman disease, which may include: Fever, Unintended weight loss, Fatigue, Night sweats, Nausea, Enlarged liver or spleen.
The enlarged lymph nodes associated with multicentric Castleman disease are most commonly located in the neck, collarbone, underarm and groin areas.
If you notice an enlarged lymph node on the side of your neck or in your underarm, collarbone or groin area, talk to your doctor. Also call your doctor if you experience a persistent feeling of fullness in your chest or abdomen, fever, fatigue, or unexplained weight loss.
It's not clear what causes Castleman disease. However, infection by a virus called human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) is associated with multicentric Castleman disease.
The HHV-8 virus has also been linked to the development of Kaposi's sarcoma, a cancerous tumor that can be a complication of HIV/AIDS. Studies have found that HHV-8 is present in nearly all HIV-positive people who have Castleman disease, and in about half of HIV-negative people with Castleman disease.
Castleman disease can affect people of any age. But the average age of people diagnosed with unicentric Castleman disease is 35. Most people with the multicentric form are in their 50s and 60s. The multicentric form is also slightly more common in men than in women.
The risk of developing multicentric Castleman disease is higher in people who are infected with a virus called human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8).
People with unicentric Castleman disease usually do well once the affected lymph node is removed. Multicentric Castleman disease may lead to life-threatening infections or organ failure. People who also have HIV/AIDS generally have the worst outcomes.
Having either variety of Castleman disease may increase your risk of lymphoma.
Signs and symptoms of cataracts include: Clouded, blurred or dim vision, Increasing difficulty with vision at night, Sensitivity to light and glare, Need for brighter light for reading and other activities, Seeing "halos" around lights, Frequent changes in eyeglass or contact lens prescription, Fading or yellowing of colors, Double vision in a single eye.
At first, the cloudiness in your vision caused by a cataract may affect only a small part of the eye's lens and you may be unaware of any vision loss. As the cataract grows larger, it clouds more of your lens and distorts the light passing through the lens. This may lead to more noticeable symptoms.
Make an appointment for an eye exam if you notice any changes in your vision. If you develop sudden vision changes, such as double vision or flashes of light, sudden eye pain, or sudden headache, see your doctor right away.
Most cataracts develop when aging or injury changes the tissue that makes up your eye's lens.
Some inherited genetic disorders that cause other health problems can increase your risk of cataracts. Cataracts can also be caused by other eye conditions, past eye surgery or medical conditions such as diabetes. Long-term use of steroid medications, too, can cause cataracts to develop.
The lens, where cataracts form, is positioned behind the colored part of your eye (iris). The lens focuses light that passes into your eye, producing clear, sharp images on the retina — the light-sensitive membrane in the eye that functions like the film in a camera.
As you age, the lenses in your eyes become less flexible, less transparent and thicker. Age-related and other medical conditions cause tissues within the lens to break down and clump together, clouding small areas within the lens.
As the cataract continues to develop, the clouding becomes denser and involves a bigger part of the lens. A cataract scatters and blocks the light as it passes through the lens, preventing a sharply defined image from reaching your retina. As a result, your vision becomes blurred.
Cataracts generally develop in both eyes, but not evenly. The cataract in one eye may be more advanced than the other, causing a difference in vision between eyes.
Cataract types include:
Cataracts affecting the center of the lens (nuclear cataracts). A nuclear cataract may at first cause more nearsightedness or even a temporary improvement in your reading vision. But with time, the lens gradually turns more densely yellow and further clouds your vision.
As the cataract slowly progresses, the lens may even turn brown. Advanced yellowing or browning of the lens can lead to difficulty distinguishing between shades of color.
Cataracts that affect the edges of the lens (cortical cataracts). A cortical cataract begins as whitish, wedge-shaped opacities or streaks on the outer edge of the lens cortex. As it slowly progresses, the streaks extend to the center and interfere with light passing through the center of the lens.
Cataracts that affect the back of the lens (posterior subcapsular cataracts). A posterior subcapsular cataract starts as a small, opaque area that usually forms near the back of the lens, right in the path of light. A posterior subcapsular cataract often interferes with your reading vision, reduces your vision in bright light, and causes glare or halos around lights at night. These types of cataracts tend to progress faster than other types do.
Cataracts you're born with (congenital cataracts). Some people are born with cataracts or develop them during childhood. These cataracts may be genetic, or associated with an intrauterine infection or trauma.
These cataracts also may be due to certain conditions, such as myotonic dystrophy, galactosemia, neurofibromatosis type 2 or rubella. Congenital cataracts don't always affect vision, but if they do they're usually removed soon after detection.
Factors that increase your risk of cataracts include: Increasing age, Diabetes, Excessive exposure to sunlight, Smoking, Obesity, High blood pressure, Previous eye injury or inflammation, Previous eye surgery, Prolonged use of corticosteroid medications, Drinking excessive amounts of alcohol.
Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCMs) may exist without apparent symptoms. Obvious symptoms tend to occur when recurrent episodes of bleeding or blood clot formation lead either to seizures, for upper lobe CCMs, or to focal or vision issues, for CCMs in the brainstem, basal ganglia and spinal cord.
Generally, signs and symptoms of CCMs may include weakness, numbness, difficulty speaking, difficulty understanding others, unsteadiness, vision changes or severe headache. Seizures also can occur, and neurological issues can progressively worsen over time with recurrent bleeding (hemorrhage). Repeat bleeding can occur soon after an initial bleed or much later, or a repeat bleed may never occur.
Seek medical help immediately if you experience any symptoms of seizure, or signs and symptoms that suggest brain hemorrhage, such as: Sudden, severe headache, Nausea, Vomiting, Weakness or numbness on one side of the body, Difficulties in speaking or understanding speech, Loss of vision, Double vision, Balance difficulties.
Most CCMs occur as a single formation, without an apparent cause and without any family history.
However, roughly 20 percent of affected people have a familial (inherited) form of the disorder. In many cases, such people can identify similarly affected family members, most often with multiple malformations. A diagnosis of the inherited form can be confirmed by genetic testing.
Some CCMs can also occur following focal brain radiation therapy.
As mentioned above, while most CCMs occur with no clear cause, the genetic (inherited familial) form of the condition can cause multiple cavernous malformations, both initially and over time.
To date, research has identified three genetic variants responsible for familial cavernous malformations, to which almost all familial cases of cavernous malformations have been traced.
The most concerning complications of CCMs stem from recurrent bleeding (hemorrhage), which may lead to progressive neurological damage.
Hemorrhages are more likely to recur in people with prior diagnosed hemorrhages. They're also more likely to reoccur with malformations located in the brainstem.
The signs and symptoms of cavities vary, depending on their extent and location. When a cavity is just beginning, you may not have any symptoms at all. As the decay gets larger, it may cause signs and symptoms such as: Toothache, spontaneous pain or pain that occurs without any apparent cause, Tooth sensitivity, Mild to sharp pain when eating or drinking something sweet, hot or cold, Visible holes or pits in your teeth, Brown, black or white staining on any surface of a tooth, Pain when you bite down.
You may not be aware that a cavity is forming. That's why it's important to have regular dental checkups and cleanings, even when your mouth feels fine. However, if you experience a toothache or mouth pain, see your dentist as soon as possible.
Cavities are caused by tooth decay — a process that occurs over time. Here's how tooth decay develops:
Plaque forms. Dental plaque is a clear sticky film that coats your teeth. It's due to eating a lot of sugars and starches and not cleaning your teeth well. When sugars and starches aren't cleaned off your teeth, bacteria quickly begin feeding on them and form plaque. Plaque that stays on your teeth can harden under or above your gum line into tartar (calculus). Tartar makes plaque more difficult to remove and creates a shield for bacteria.
Plaque attacks. The acids in plaque remove minerals in your tooth's hard, outer enamel. This erosion causes tiny openings or holes in the enamel — the first stage of cavities. Once areas of enamel are worn away, the bacteria and acid can reach the next layer of your teeth, called dentin. This layer is softer than enamel and less resistant to acid. Dentin has tiny tubes that directly communicate with the nerve of the tooth causing sensitivity.
Destruction continues. As tooth decay develops, the bacteria and acid continue their march through your teeth, moving next to the inner tooth material (pulp) that contains nerves and blood vessels. The pulp becomes swollen and irritated from the bacteria. Because there is no place for the swelling to expand inside of a tooth, the nerve becomes pressed, causing pain. Discomfort can even extend outside of the tooth root to the bone.
Everyone who has teeth is at risk of getting cavities, but the following factors can increase risk:
Tooth location. Decay most often occurs in your back teeth (molars and premolars). These teeth have lots of grooves, pits and crannies, and multiple roots that can collect food particles. As a result, they're harder to keep clean than your smoother, easy-to-reach front teeth.
Certain foods and drinks. Foods that cling to your teeth for a long time — such as milk, ice cream, honey, sugar, soda, dried fruit, cake, cookies, hard candy and mints, dry cereal, and chips — are more likely to cause decay than foods that are easily washed away by saliva.
Frequent snacking or sipping. When you steadily snack or sip sugary drinks, you give mouth bacteria more fuel to produce acids that attack your teeth and wear them down. And sipping soda or other acidic drinks throughout the day helps create a continual acid bath over your teeth.
Bedtime infant feeding. When babies are given bedtime bottles filled with milk, formula, juice or other sugar-containing liquids, these beverages remain on their teeth for hours while they sleep, feeding decay-causing bacteria. This damage is often called baby bottle tooth decay. Similar damage can occur when toddlers wander around drinking from a sippy cup filled with these beverages.
Inadequate brushing. If you don't clean your teeth soon after eating and drinking, plaque forms quickly and the first stages of decay can begin.
Not getting enough fluoride. Fluoride, a naturally occurring mineral, helps prevent cavities and can even reverse the earliest stages of tooth damage. Because of its benefits for teeth, fluoride is added to many public water supplies. It's also a common ingredient in toothpaste and mouth rinses. But bottled water usually does not contain fluoride.
Younger or older age. In the United States, cavities are common in very young children and teenagers. Older adults also are at higher risk. Over time, teeth can wear down and gums may recede, making teeth more vulnerable to root decay. Older adults also may use more medications that reduce saliva flow, increasing the risk of tooth decay.
Dry mouth. Dry mouth is caused by a lack of saliva, which helps prevent tooth decay by washing away food and plaque from your teeth. Substances found in saliva also help counter the acid produced by bacteria. Certain medications, some medical conditions, radiation to your head or neck, or certain chemotherapy drugs can increase your risk of cavities by reducing saliva production.
Worn fillings or dental devices. Over the years, dental fillings can weaken, begin to break down or develop rough edges. This allows plaque to build up more easily and makes it harder to remove. Dental devices can stop fitting well, allowing decay to begin underneath them.
Heartburn. Heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) can cause stomach acid to flow into your mouth (reflux), wearing away the enamel of your teeth and causing significant tooth damage. This exposes more of the dentin to attack by bacteria, creating tooth decay. Your dentist may recommend that you consult your doctor to see if gastric reflux is the cause of your enamel loss.
Eating disorders. Anorexia and bulimia can lead to significant tooth erosion and cavities. Stomach acid from repeated vomiting (purging) washes over the teeth and begins dissolving the enamel. Eating disorders also can interfere with saliva production.
Cavities and tooth decay are so common that you may not take them seriously. And you may think that it doesn't matter if children get cavities in their baby teeth. However, cavities and tooth decay can have serious and lasting complications, even for children who don't have their permanent teeth yet.
Complications of cavities may include: Pain, Tooth abscess, Swelling or pus around a tooth, Damage or broken teeth, Chewing problems, Positioning shifts of teeth after tooth loss.
When cavities and decay become severe, you may have: Pain that interferes with daily living, Weight loss or nutrition problems from painful or difficult eating or chewing, Tooth loss, which may affect your appearance, as well as your confidence and self-esteem, In rare cases, a tooth abscess — a pocket of pus that's caused by bacterial infection — which can lead to more serious or even life-threatening infections.
The signs and symptoms of celiac disease can vary greatly and differ in children and adults. Digestive signs and symptoms for adults include: Diarrhea, Fatigue, Weight loss, Bloating and gas, Abdominal pain, Nausea and vomiting, Constipation.
However, more than half the adults with celiac disease have signs and symptoms unrelated to the digestive system, including: Anemia, usually from iron deficiency, Loss of bone density (osteoporosis) or softening of bone (osteomalacia), Itchy, blistery skin rash (dermatitis herpetiformis), Mouth ulcers, Headaches and fatigue, Nervous system injury, including numbness and tingling in the feet and hands, possible problems with balance, and cognitive impairment, Joint pain, Reduced functioning of the spleen (hyposplenism).
Children with celiac disease are more likely than adults to have digestive problems, including: Nausea and vomiting, Chronic diarrhea, Swollen belly, Constipation, Gas, Pale, foul-smelling stools.
The inability to absorb nutrients might result in: Failure to thrive for infants, Damage to tooth enamel, Weight loss, Anemia, Irritability, Short stature, Delayed puberty, Neurological symptoms, including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), learning disabilities, headaches, lack of muscle coordination and seizures.
Gluten intolerance can cause this itchy, blistering skin disease. The rash usually occurs on the elbows, knees, torso, scalp and buttocks. This condition is often associated with changes to the lining of the small intestine identical to those of celiac disease, but the skin condition might not cause digestive symptoms.
Doctors treat dermatitis herpetiformis with a gluten-free diet or medication, or both, to control the rash.
Consult your doctor if you have diarrhea or digestive discomfort that lasts for more than two weeks. Consult your child's doctor if your child is pale, irritable or failing to grow or has a potbelly and foul-smelling, bulky stools.
Be sure to consult your doctor before trying a gluten-free diet. If you stop or even reduce the amount of gluten you eat before you're tested for celiac disease, you can change the test results.
Celiac disease tends to run in families. If someone in your family has the condition, ask your doctor if you should be tested. Also ask your doctor about testing if you or someone in your family has a risk factor for celiac disease, such as type 1 diabetes.
Your genes combined with eating foods with gluten and other factors can contribute to celiac disease, but the precise cause isn't known. Infant-feeding practices, gastrointestinal infections and gut bacteria might contribute, as well. Sometimes celiac disease becomes active after surgery, pregnancy, childbirth, viral infection or severe emotional stress.
When the body's immune system overreacts to gluten in food, the reaction damages the tiny, hairlike projections (villi) that line the small intestine. Villi absorb vitamins, minerals and other nutrients from the food you eat. If your villi are damaged, you can't get enough nutrients, no matter how much you eat.
Celiac disease tends to be more common in people who have: A family member with celiac disease or dermatitis herpetiformis, Type 1 diabetes, Down syndrome or Turner syndrome, Autoimmune thyroid disease, Microscopic colitis (lymphocytic or collagenous colitis), Addison's disease.
Cellulite looks like dimpled or bumpy skin. It's sometimes described as having a cottage cheese or orange peel texture.
You can see mild cellulite only if you pinch your skin in an area where you have cellulite, such as your thighs. Cellulite that is more severe makes the skin appear rumpled and bumpy with areas of peaks and valleys.
Cellulite is most common around the thighs and buttocks, but it can also be found on the breasts, lower abdomen and upper arms.
Treatment isn't necessary. But if you're concerned about the appearance of your skin, talk with your primary care doctor or a specialist in skin diseases (dermatologist) or plastic surgery about treatment options.
Little is known about what causes cellulite. It involves fibrous connective cords that tether the skin to the underlying muscle, with the fat lying between. As fat cells accumulate, they push up against the skin, while the long, tough cords pull down. This creates an uneven surface or dimpling.
In addition, hormonal factors play a large role in the development of cellulite, and genetics determine skin structure, skin texture and body type. Other factors, such as weight and muscle tone affect whether you have cellulite, though even very fit people can have it.
Cellulite is much more common in women than in men. In fact, most women develop some cellulite after puberty. This is because women's fat is typically distributed in the thighs, hips and buttocks — common areas for cellulite. Cellulite is also more common with aging, when the skin loses elasticity.
Weight gain can make cellulite more noticeable, but some lean people have cellulite, as well. It tends to run in families, so genetics might play the biggest role in whether you develop cellulite. An inactive lifestyle also can increase your chances of having cellulite, as can pregnancy.
Possible signs and symptoms of cellulitis, which usually occur on one side of the body, include: Red area of skin that tends to expand, Swelling, Tenderness, Pain, Warmth, Fever, Red spots, Blisters, Skin dimpling.
It's important to identify and treat cellulitis early because the condition can spread rapidly throughout your body.
Seek emergency care if: You have a red, swollen, tender rash or a rash that's changing rapidly, You have a fever.
See your doctor, preferably that day, if: You have a rash that's red, swollen, tender and warm — and it's expanding — but without fever.
Cellulitis occurs when bacteria, most commonly streptococcus and staphylococcus, enter through a crack or break in your skin. The incidence of a more serious staphylococcus infection called methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is increasing.
Although cellulitis can occur anywhere on your body, the most common location is the lower leg. Bacteria are most likely to enter disrupted areas of skin, such as where you've had recent surgery, cuts, puncture wounds, an ulcer, athlete's foot or dermatitis.
Animal bites can cause cellulitis. Bacteria can also enter through areas of dry, flaky skin or swollen skin.
Several factors put you at increased risk of cellulitis:
Injury. Any cut, fracture, burn or scrape gives bacteria an entry point.
Weakened immune system. Conditions that weaken your immune system — such as diabetes, leukemia and HIV/AIDS — leave you more susceptible to infections. Certain medications also can weaken your immune system.
Skin conditions. Conditions such as eczema, athlete's foot and shingles can cause breaks in the skin, which give bacteria an entry point.
Chronic swelling of your arms or legs (lymphedema). This condition sometimes follows surgery.
History of cellulitis. Having had cellulitis before makes you prone to develop it again.
Obesity. Being overweight or obese increases your risk of developing cellulitis.
Recurrent episodes of cellulitis may damage the lymphatic drainage system and cause chronic swelling of the affected limb.
Rarely, the infection can spread to the deep layer of tissue called the fascial lining. Necrotizing fasciitis is an example of a deep-layer infection. It's an extreme emergency.
Common signs and symptoms of central sleep apnea include: Observed episodes of stopped breathing or abnormal breathing patterns during sleep, Abrupt awakenings accompanied by shortness of breath, Shortness of breath that's relieved by sitting up, Difficulty staying asleep (insomnia), Excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnia), Chest pain at night, Difficulty concentrating, Mood changes, Morning headaches, Snoring, Lower tolerance for exercise.
Although snoring indicates some degree of airflow obstruction, snoring also may be heard in the presence of central sleep apnea. However, snoring may not be as prominent with central sleep apnea as it is with obstructive sleep apnea.
Consult a medical professional if you experience — or if your partner observes — any signs or symptoms of central sleep apnea, particularly the following: Shortness of breath that awakens you from sleep, Intermittent pauses in your breathing during sleep, Difficulty staying asleep, Excessive daytime drowsiness, which may cause you to fall asleep while you're working, watching television or even driving.
Ask your doctor about any sleep problem that leaves you chronically fatigued, sleepy and irritable. Excessive daytime drowsiness may be due to other disorders, such as not allowing yourself time to get enough sleep at night (chronic sleep deprivation), sudden attacks of sleep (narcolepsy) or obstructive sleep apnea.
Central sleep apnea occurs when your brain fails to transmit signals to your breathing muscles.
Central sleep apnea can be caused by a number of conditions that affect the ability of your brainstem — which links your brain to your spinal cord and controls many functions such as heart rate and breathing — to control your breathing.
The cause varies with the type of central sleep apnea you have. Types include:
Cheyne-Stokes breathing. This type of central sleep apnea is most commonly associated with congestive heart failure or stroke.
Cheyne-Stokes breathing is characterized by a gradual increase and then decrease in breathing effort and airflow. During the weakest breathing effort, a total lack of airflow (central sleep apnea) can occur.
Drug-induced apnea. Taking certain medications such as opioids — including morphine (Ms Contin, Kadian, others), oxycodone (Roxicodone, Oxycontin, others) or codeine — may cause your breathing to become irregular, to increase and decrease in a regular pattern, or to temporarily stop completely.
High-altitude periodic breathing. A Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern may occur if you're exposed to a very high altitude. The change in oxygen at this altitude is the reason for the alternating rapid breathing (hyperventilation) and underbreathing.
Treatment-emergent central sleep apnea. Some people with obstructive sleep apnea develop central sleep apnea while using continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for their sleep apnea treatment. This condition is known as treatment-emergent central sleep apnea and is a combination of obstructive and central sleep apneas.
Medical condition-induced central sleep apnea. Several medical conditions, including end-stage kidney disease and stroke, may give rise to central sleep apnea of the non-Cheyne-Stokes variety.
Idiopathic (primary) central sleep apnea. The cause of this uncommon type of central sleep apnea isn't known.
Certain factors put you at increased risk of central sleep apnea:
Sex. Males are more likely to develop central sleep apnea than are females.
Age. Central sleep apnea is more common among older adults, especially adults older than age 65, possibly because they may have other medical conditions or sleep patterns that are more likely to cause central sleep apnea.
Heart disorders. People with irregular heartbeats (atrial fibrillation) or whose heart muscles don't pump enough blood for the body's needs (congestive heart failure) are at greater risk of central sleep apnea.
Stroke, brain tumor or a structural brainstem lesion. These brain conditions can impair the brain's ability to regulate breathing.
High altitude. Sleeping at an altitude higher than you're accustomed to may increase your risk of sleep apnea. High-altitude sleep apnea is no longer a problem a few weeks after returning to a lower altitude.
Opioid use. Opioid medications may increase the risk of central sleep apnea.
CPAP. Some people with obstructive sleep apnea develop central sleep apnea while using continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). This condition is known as treatment-emergent central sleep apnea. It is a combination of obstructive and central sleep apneas.
For most people, treatment-emergent central sleep apnea goes away with continued use of a CPAP device. Other people may be treated with a different kind of positive airway pressure therapy.
Central sleep apnea is a serious medical condition. Some complications include:
Fatigue. The repeated awakenings associated with sleep apnea make normal, restorative sleep impossible. People with central sleep apnea often experience severe fatigue, daytime drowsiness and irritability.
You may have difficulty concentrating and find yourself falling asleep at work, while watching television or even when driving.
Cardiovascular problems. In addition, sudden drops in blood oxygen levels that occur during central sleep apnea may adversely affect heart health.
If there's underlying heart disease, these repeated multiple episodes of low blood oxygen (hypoxia or hypoxemia) worsen prognosis and increase the risk of abnormal heart rhythms.
Signs and symptoms can vary greatly. Movement and coordination problems associated with cerebral palsy include: Variations in muscle tone, such as being either too stiff or too floppy, Stiff muscles and exaggerated reflexes (spasticity), Stiff muscles with normal reflexes (rigidity), Lack of balance and muscle coordination (ataxia), Tremors or involuntary movements, Slow, writhing movements, Delays in reaching motor skills milestones, such as pushing up on arms, sitting up or crawling, Favoring one side of the body, such as reaching with one hand or dragging a leg while crawling, Difficulty walking, such as walking on toes, a crouched gait, a scissors-like gait with knees crossing, a wide gait or an asymmetrical gait, Excessive drooling or problems with swallowing, Difficulty with sucking or eating, Delays in speech development or difficulty speaking, Learning difficulties, Difficulty with fine motor skills, such as buttoning clothes or picking up utensils, Seizures.
Cerebral palsy can affect the whole body, or it might be limited primarily to one limb or one side of the body. The brain disorder causing cerebral palsy doesn't change with time, so the symptoms usually don't worsen with age.
However, as the child gets older, some symptoms might become more or less apparent. And muscle shortening and muscle rigidity can worsen if not treated aggressively.
Brain abnormalities associated with cerebral palsy might also contribute to other neurological problems, including: Difficulty seeing and hearing, Intellectual disabilities, Seizures, Abnormal touch or pain perceptions, Oral diseases, Mental health conditions, Urinary incontinence.
It's important to get a prompt diagnosis for a movement disorder or delays in your child's development. See your child's doctor if you have concerns about episodes of loss of awareness of surroundings or of abnormal bodily movements, abnormal muscle tone, impaired coordination, swallowing difficulties, eye muscle imbalance or other developmental issues.
Cerebral palsy is caused by an abnormality or disruption in brain development, most often before a child is born. In many cases, the cause isn't known. Factors that can lead to problems with brain development include: Gene mutations that lead to abnormal development, Maternal infections that affect the developing fetus, Fetal stroke, a disruption of blood supply to the developing brain, Bleeding into the brain in the womb or as a newborn, Infant infections that cause inflammation in or around the brain, Traumatic head injury to an infant from a motor vehicle accident or fall, Lack of oxygen to the brain related to difficult labor or delivery, although birth-related asphyxia is much less commonly a cause than historically thought.
A number of factors are associated with an increased risk of cerebral palsy.
Certain infections or toxic exposures during pregnancy can significantly increase cerebral palsy risk to the baby. Infections of particular concern include:
Cytomegalovirus. This common virus causes flu-like symptoms and can lead to birth defects if a mother has her first active infection during pregnancy.
German measles (rubella). This viral infection can be prevented with a vaccine.
Herpes. This can be passed from mother to child during pregnancy, affecting the womb and placenta. Inflammation triggered by infection can damage the unborn baby's developing nervous system.
Syphilis. This is a sexually transmitted bacterial infection.
Toxoplasmosis. This infection is caused by a parasite found in contaminated food, soil and the feces of infected cats.
Zika virus infection. Infants for whom maternal Zika infection causes their head size to be smaller than normal (microcephaly) can develop cerebral palsy.
Other conditions. Other conditions that can increase the risk of cerebral palsy include thyroid problems, intellectual disabilities or seizures, and exposure to toxins, such as methyl mercury.
Illnesses in a newborn baby that can greatly increase the risk of cerebral palsy include:
Bacterial meningitis. This bacterial infection causes inflammation in the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord.
Viral encephalitis. This viral infection similarly causes inflammation in the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord.
Severe or untreated jaundice. Jaundice appears as a yellowing of the skin. The condition occurs when certain byproducts of "used" blood cells aren't filtered from the bloodstream.
Bleeding into the brain. This condition is commonly caused by the baby having a stroke in the womb.
While the potential contribution from each is limited, additional pregnancy or birth factors associated with increased cerebral palsy risk include:
Breech presentation. Babies with cerebral palsy are more likely to be in this feet-first position at the beginning of labor rather than being headfirst.
Low birth weight. Babies who weigh less than 5.5 pounds (2.5 kilograms) are at higher risk of developing cerebral palsy. This risk increases as birth weight drops.
Multiple babies. Cerebral palsy risk increases with the number of babies sharing the uterus. If one or more of the babies die, the survivors' risk of cerebral palsy increases.
Premature birth. Babies born fewer than 28 weeks into the pregnancy are at higher risk of cerebral palsy. The earlier a baby is born, the greater the cerebral palsy risk.
Muscle weakness, muscle spasticity and coordination problems can contribute to a number of complications either during childhood or in adulthood, including:
Contracture. Contracture is muscle tissue shortening due to severe muscle tightening (spasticity). Contracture can inhibit bone growth, cause bones to bend, and result in joint deformities, dislocation or partial dislocation.
Premature aging. Some type of premature aging will affect most people with cerebral palsy in their 40s because of the strain the condition puts on their bodies.
Malnutrition. Swallowing or feeding problems can make it difficult for someone who has cerebral palsy, particularly an infant, to get enough nutrition. This can impair growth and weaken bones. Some children need a feeding tube to get enough nutrition.
Mental health conditions. People with cerebral palsy might have mental health conditions, such as depression. Social isolation and the challenges of coping with disabilities can contribute to depression.
Heart and lung disease. People with cerebral palsy may develop heart disease and lung disease and breathing disorders.
Osteoarthritis. Pressure on joints or abnormal alignment of joints from muscle spasticity may lead to the early onset of this painful degenerative bone disease.
Osteopenia. Fractures due to low bone density (osteopenia) can stem from several common factors such as lack of mobility, nutritional shortcomings and anti-epileptic drug use.
Early-stage cervical cancer generally produces no signs or symptoms.
Signs and symptoms of more-advanced cervical cancer include: Vaginal bleeding after intercourse, between periods or after menopause, Watery, bloody vaginal discharge that may be heavy and have a foul odor, Pelvic pain or pain during intercourse.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that concern you.
Cervical cancer begins when healthy cells in the cervix develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do.
Healthy cells grow and multiply at a set rate, eventually dying at a set time. The mutations tell the cells to grow and multiply out of control, and they don't die. The accumulating abnormal cells form a mass (tumor). Cancer cells invade nearby tissues and can break off from a tumor to spread (metastasize) elsewhere in the body.
It isn't clear what causes cervical cancer, but it's certain that HPV plays a role. HPV is very common, and most people with the virus never develop cancer. This means other factors — such as your environment or your lifestyle choices — also determine whether you'll develop cervical cancer.
The type of cervical cancer that you have helps determine your prognosis and treatment. The main types of cervical cancer are:
Squamous cell carcinoma. This type of cervical cancer begins in the thin, flat cells (squamous cells) lining the outer part of the cervix, which projects into the vagina. Most cervical cancers are squamous cell carcinomas.
Adenocarcinoma. This type of cervical cancer begins in the column-shaped glandular cells that line the cervical canal.
Sometimes, both types of cells are involved in cervical cancer. Very rarely, cancer occurs in other cells in the cervix.
Risk factors for cervical cancer include:
Many sexual partners. The greater your number of sexual partners — and the greater your partner's number of sexual partners — the greater your chance of acquiring  HPV.
Early sexual activity. Having sex at an early age increases your risk of  HPV.
Other sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Having other STIs — such as chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis and HIV/AIDS — increases your risk of  HPV.
A weakened immune system. You may be more likely to develop cervical cancer if your immune system is weakened by another health condition and you have  HPV.
Smoking. Smoking is associated with squamous cell cervical cancer.
Exposure to miscarriage prevention drug. If your mother took a drug called diethylstilbestrol (DES) while pregnant in the 1950s, you may have an increased risk of a certain type of cervical cancer called clear cell adenocarcinoma.
The muscle contractions involved in cervical dystonia can cause your head to twist in a variety of directions, including: Chin toward shoulder, Ear toward shoulder, Chin straight up, Chin straight down.
The most common type of twisting associated with cervical dystonia is when your chin is pulled toward your shoulder. Some people experience a combination of abnormal head postures. A jerking motion of the head also may occur.
Many people who have cervical dystonia also experience neck pain that can radiate into the shoulders. The disorder can also cause headaches. In some people, the pain from cervical dystonia can be exhausting and disabling.
In most people with cervical dystonia, the cause is unknown. Some people who have cervical dystonia have a family history of the disorder. Researchers have found gene mutations associated with cervical dystonia. Cervical dystonia is also sometimes linked to head, neck or shoulder injuries.
Risk factors for cervical dystonia include:
Age. While the disorder can occur in people of any age, it most commonly begins after age 30.
Your sex. Women are more likely to develop cervical dystonia than are men.
Family history. If a close family member has cervical dystonia or some other type of dystonia, you are at higher risk of developing the disorder.
In some cases, the involuntary muscle contractions associated with cervical dystonia can spread to nearby areas of your body. The most common locations include the face, jaw, arms and trunk.
People who have cervical dystonia may also develop bone spurs that may reduce the amount of space in the spinal canal. This can cause tingling, numbness and weakness in the arms, hands, legs or feet.
For most people, cervical spondylosis causes no symptoms. When symptoms do occur, they typically include pain and stiffness in the neck.
Sometimes, cervical spondylosis results in a narrowing of the space needed by the spinal cord and the nerve roots that pass through the spine to the rest of your body. If the spinal cord or nerve roots become pinched, you might experience: Tingling, numbness and weakness in your arms, hands, legs or feet, Lack of coordination and difficulty walking, Loss of bladder or bowel control.
Seek medical attention if you notice a sudden onset of numbness or weakness, or loss of bladder or bowel control.
As you age, the bones and cartilage that make up your backbone and neck gradually develop wear and tear. These changes can include:
Dehydrated disks. Disks act like cushions between the vertebrae of your spine. By the age of 40, most people's spinal disks begin drying out and shrinking, which allows more bone-on-bone contact between the vertebrae.
Herniated disks. Age also affects the exterior of your spinal disks. Cracks often appear, leading to bulging (herniated) disks — which sometimes can press on the spinal cord and nerve roots.
Bone spurs. Disk degeneration often results in the spine producing extra amounts of bone in a misguided effort to strengthen the spine. These bone spurs can sometimes pinch the spinal cord and nerve roots.
Stiff ligaments. Ligaments are cords of tissue that connect bone to bone. Spinal ligaments can stiffen with age, making your neck less flexible.
Risk factors for cervical spondylosis include:
Age. Cervical spondylosis is a normal part of aging.
Occupation. Jobs that involve repetitive neck motions, awkward positioning or a lot of overhead work put extra stress on your neck.
Neck injuries. Previous neck injuries appear to increase the risk of cervical spondylosis.
Genetic factors. Some individuals in certain families will experience more of these changes over time, while others will not.
Smoking. Smoking has been linked to increased neck pain.
If your spinal cord or nerve roots become severely compressed as a result of cervical spondylosis, the damage can be permanent.
Most often, cervicitis causes no signs and symptoms, and you may only learn you have the condition after a pelvic exam performed by your doctor for another reason. If you do have signs and symptoms, they may include: Large amounts of unusual vaginal discharge, Frequent, painful urination, Pain during intercourse, Bleeding between menstrual periods, Vaginal bleeding after intercourse, not associated with a menstrual period.
See your doctor if you have: Persistent, unusual vaginal discharge, Nonmenstrual vaginal bleeding, Pain during intercourse.
Possible causes of cervicitis include:
Sexually transmitted infections. Most often, the bacterial and viral infections that cause cervicitis are transmitted by sexual contact. Cervicitis can result from common sexually transmitted infections (STIs), including gonorrhea, chlamydia, trichomoniasis and genital herpes.
Allergic reactions. An allergy, either to contraceptive spermicides or to latex in condoms, may lead to cervicitis. A reaction to feminine hygiene products, such as douches or feminine deodorants, also can cause cervicitis.
Bacterial overgrowth. An overgrowth of some of the bacteria that are normally present in the vagina (bacterial vaginosis) can lead to cervicitis.
You're at greater risk of cervicitis if you: Engage in high-risk sexual behavior, such as unprotected sex, sex with multiple partners or sex with someone who engages in high-risk behaviors, Began having sexual intercourse at an early age, Have a history of sexually transmitted infections.
Your cervix acts as a barrier to keep bacteria and viruses from entering your uterus. When the cervix is infected, there's an increased risk that the infection will travel into your uterus.
Cervicitis that's caused by gonorrhea or chlamydia can spread to the uterine lining and the fallopian tubes, resulting in pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), an infection of the female reproductive organs that can cause fertility problems if left untreated.
Cervicitis can also increase the risk of a woman getting HIV from an infected sexual partner.
Signs and symptoms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease may include: Weakness in your legs, ankles and feet, Loss of muscle bulk in your legs and feet, High foot arches, Curled toes (hammertoes), Decreased ability to run, Difficulty lifting your foot at the ankle (footdrop), Awkward or higher than normal step (gait), Frequent tripping or falling, Decreased sensation or a loss of feeling in your legs and feet.
As Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease progresses, symptoms may spread from the feet and legs to the hands and arms. The severity of symptoms can vary greatly from person to person, even among family members.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is an inherited, genetic condition. It occurs when there are mutations in the genes that affect the nerves in your feet, legs, hands and arms.
Sometimes, these mutations damage the nerves. Other mutations damage the protective coating that surrounds the nerve (myelin sheath). Both cause weaker messages to travel between your extremities and brain.
That means some of the muscles in your feet may not receive your brain's signal to contract, so you're more likely to trip and fall. And your brain may not receive pain messages from your feet, so if you've rubbed a blister on your toe, for example, it may get infected without your realizing it.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is hereditary, so you're at higher risk of developing the disorder if anyone in your immediate family has had the disease. Other causes of neuropathies, such as diabetes, may cause symptoms similar to or worsen Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
Other causes of neuropathies, such as diabetes, may cause symptoms similar to or worsen those of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Also, medications such as the chemotherapy drugs vincristine (Marqibo), paclitaxel (Abraxane, Taxol) and others can make symptoms worse. Be sure to let your doctor know about all of the medications you’re taking.
Complications of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease vary in severity from person to person. Foot abnormalities and difficulty walking are usually the most serious problems. Muscles may get weaker, and you may injure areas of the body that experience decreased sensation.
You may also experience difficulty breathing, swallowing or speaking if the muscles that control these functions are affected by Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
Signs and symptoms of chemo brain may include the following: Being unusually disorganized, Confusion, Difficulty concentrating, Difficulty finding the right word, Difficulty learning new skills, Difficulty multitasking, Feeling of mental fogginess, Short attention span, Short-term memory problems, Taking longer than usual to complete routine tasks, Trouble with verbal memory, such as remembering a conversation, Trouble with visual memory, such as recalling an image or list of words.
If you experience troubling memory or thinking problems, make an appointment with your doctor. Keep a journal of your signs and symptoms so that your doctor can better understand how your memory problems are affecting your everyday life.
There are many possible factors that might contribute to the signs and symptoms of memory problems in cancer survivors.
Cancer-related causes could include: A cancer diagnosis can be quite stressful and it might lead to anxiety and depression, which can contribute to thinking and memory problems, Certain cancers can produce chemicals that affect memory, Cancers that begin in the brain or spread to the brain might cause changes in thinking.
Bone marrow transplant, Chemotherapy, Hormone therapy, Immunotherapy, Radiation therapy, Surgery, Targeted drug therapy.
Anemia, Fatigue, Infection, Menopause or other hormonal changes (caused by cancer treatment), Sleep problems, Pain due to cancer treatments.
Inherited susceptibility to chemo brain, Medications for other cancer-related signs and symptoms, such as pain medications, Other medical conditions, such as diabetes, thyroid problems, depression, anxiety and nutritional deficiency.
Factors that may increase the risk of memory problems in cancer survivors include: Brain cancer, Cancer that spreads (metastasizes) to the brain, Higher doses of chemotherapy or radiation, Radiation therapy to the brain, Younger age at time of cancer diagnosis and treatment, Increasing age.
Chest pain can cause many different sensations depending on what's triggering the symptom. Often, the cause has nothing to do with your heart — though there's no easy way to tell without seeing a doctor.
Although chest pain is often associated with heart disease, many people with heart disease say they experience a vague discomfort that isn't necessarily identified as pain. In general, chest discomfort related to a heart attack or another heart problem may be described by or associated with one or more of the following: Pressure, fullness, burning or tightness in your chest, Crushing or searing pain that radiates to your back, neck, jaw, shoulders, and one or both arms, Pain that lasts more than a few minutes, gets worse with activity, goes away and comes back, or varies in intensity, Shortness of breath, Cold sweats, Dizziness or weakness, Nausea or vomiting.
It can be difficult to distinguish heart-related chest pain from other types of chest pain. However, chest pain that is less likely due to a heart problem is more often associated with: A sour taste or a sensation of food re-entering your mouth, Trouble swallowing, Pain that gets better or worse when you change your body position, Pain that intensifies when you breathe deeply or cough, Tenderness when you push on your chest, Pain that is persistently present for many hours.
The classic symptoms of heartburn — a painful, burning sensation behind your breastbone — can be caused by problems with your heart or your stomach.
If you have new or unexplained chest pain or suspect you're having a heart attack, call for emergency medical help immediately.
Chest pain has many possible causes, all of which need medical attention.
Examples of heart-related causes of chest pain include:
Heart attack. A heart attack results from blocked blood flow, often from a blood clot, to your heart muscle.
Angina. Angina is the term for chest pain caused by poor blood flow to the heart. This is often caused by the buildup of thick plaques on the inner walls of the arteries that carry blood to your heart. These plaques narrow the arteries and restrict the heart's blood supply, particularly during exertion.
Aortic dissection. This life-threatening condition involves the main artery leading from your heart (aorta). If the inner layers of this blood vessel separate, blood is forced between the layers and can cause the aorta to rupture.
Pericarditis. This is the inflammation of the sac surrounding your heart. It usually causes sharp pain that gets worse when you breathe in or when you lie down.
Chest pain can be caused by disorders of the digestive system, including:
Heartburn. This painful, burning sensation behind your breastbone occurs when stomach acid washes up from your stomach into the tube that connects your throat to your stomach (esophagus).
Swallowing disorders. Disorders of the esophagus can make swallowing difficult and even painful.
Gallbladder or pancreas problems. Gallstones or inflammation of your gallbladder or pancreas can cause abdominal pain that radiates to your chest.
Some types of chest pain are associated with injuries and other problems affecting the structures that make up the chest wall, including:
Costochondritis. In this condition, the cartilage of your rib cage, particularly the cartilage that joins your ribs to your breastbone, becomes inflamed and painful.
Sore muscles. Chronic pain syndromes, such as fibromyalgia, can produce persistent muscle-related chest pain.
Injured ribs. A bruised or broken rib can cause chest pain.
Many lung disorders can cause chest pain, including:
Pulmonary embolism. This occurs when a blood clot becomes lodged in a lung (pulmonary) artery, blocking blood flow to lung tissue.
Pleurisy. If the membrane that covers your lungs becomes inflamed, it can cause chest pain that worsens when you inhale or cough.
Collapsed lung. The chest pain associated with a collapsed lung typically begins suddenly and can last for hours, and is generally associated with shortness of breath. A collapsed lung occurs when air leaks into the space between the lung and the ribs.
Pulmonary hypertension. This condition occurs when you have high blood pressure in the arteries carrying blood to the lungs, which can produce chest pain.
Chest pain can also be caused by:
Panic attack. If you have periods of intense fear accompanied by chest pain, a rapid heartbeat, rapid breathing, profuse sweating, shortness of breath, nausea, dizziness and a fear of dying, you may be experiencing a panic attack.
Shingles. Caused by a reactivation of the chickenpox virus, shingles can produce pain and a band of blisters from your back around to your chest wall.
Many people with Chiari malformation have no signs or symptoms and don't need treatment. Their condition is detected only when tests are performed for unrelated disorders. However, depending on the type and severity, Chiari malformation can cause a number of problems.
The more common types of Chiari malformation are: Type I, Type II.
Although these types are less serious than the more rare pediatric form, type III, signs and symptoms still can be life disrupting.
In Chiari malformation type I, signs and symptoms usually appear during late childhood or adulthood.
Headaches, often severe, are the classic symptom of Chiari malformation. They generally occur after sudden coughing, sneezing or straining. People with Chiari malformation type I can also experience: Neck pain, Unsteady gait (problems with balance), Poor hand coordination (fine motor skills), Numbness and tingling of the hands and feet, Dizziness, Difficulty swallowing, sometimes accompanied by gagging, choking and vomiting, Speech problems, such as hoarseness.
Less often, people with Chiari malformation may experience: Ringing or buzzing in the ears (tinnitus), Weakness, Slow heart rhythm, Curvature of the spine (scoliosis) related to spinal cord impairment, Abnormal breathing, such as central sleep apnea, which is when a person stops breathing during sleep.
In Chiari malformation type II, a greater amount of tissue extends into the spinal canal compared with Chiari malformation type I.
The signs and symptoms can include those related to a form of spina bifida called myelomeningocele that nearly always accompanies Chiari malformation type II. In myelomeningocele, the backbone and the spinal canal haven't closed properly before birth.
Signs and symptoms may include: Changes in breathing pattern, Swallowing problems, such as gagging, Quick downward eye movements, Weakness in arms.
Chiari malformation type II is usually noted with ultrasound during pregnancy. It may also be diagnosed after birth or in early infancy.
In one of the most severe types of the condition, Chiari malformation type III, a portion of the lower back part of the brain (cerebellum) or the brainstem extends through an abnormal opening in the back of the skull. This form of Chiari malformation is diagnosed at birth or with an ultrasound during pregnancy.
This type of Chiari malformation has a higher mortality rate and may also cause neurological problems.
If you or your child has any of the signs and symptoms that may be associated with Chiari malformation, see your doctor for an evaluation.
Because many symptoms of Chiari malformation can also be associated with other disorders, a thorough medical evaluation is important.
Chiari malformation type I occurs when the section of your skull containing a part of your brain (cerebellum) is too small or is deformed, thus putting pressure on and crowding your brain. The lower part of the cerebellum (tonsils) is displaced into your upper spinal canal.
Chiari malformation type II is nearly always associated with a form of spina bifida called myelomeningocele.
When the cerebellum is pushed into your upper spinal canal, it can interfere with the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid that protects your brain and spinal cord.
This impaired circulation of cerebrospinal fluid can lead to the blockage of signals transmitted from your brain to your body, or to a buildup of spinal fluid in the brain or spinal cord.
Alternatively, the pressure from the cerebellum on the spinal cord or lower brainstem can cause neurological signs or symptoms.
There's some evidence that Chiari malformation runs in some families. However, research into a possible hereditary component is still in its early phase.
In some people, Chiari malformation can become a progressive disorder and lead to serious complications. In others, there may be no associated symptoms, and no intervention is necessary. The complications associated with this condition include:
Hydrocephalus. An accumulation of excess fluid within your brain (hydrocephalus) may require placement of a flexible tube (shunt) to divert and drain the cerebrospinal fluid to another area of your body.
Spina bifida. Spina bifida, a condition in which your spinal cord or its covering isn't fully developed, may occur in Chiari malformation. Part of the spinal cord is exposed, which can cause serious conditions such as paralysis. People with Chiari malformation type II usually have a form of spina bifida called myelomeningocele.
Syringomyelia. Some people with Chiari malformation also develop a condition called syringomyelia, in which a cavity or cyst (syrinx) forms within the spinal column.
Tethered cord syndrome. In this condition, your spinal cord attaches to your spine and causes your spinal cord to stretch. This can cause serious nerve and muscle damage in your lower body.
The itchy blister rash caused by chickenpox infection appears 10 to 21 days after exposure to the virus and usually lasts about five to 10 days. Other signs and symptoms, which may appear one to two days before the rash, include: Fever, Loss of appetite, Headache, Tiredness and a general feeling of being unwell (malaise).
Once the chickenpox rash appears, it goes through three phases: Raised pink or red bumps (papules), which break out over several days, Small fluid-filled blisters (vesicles), which form in about one day and then break and leak, Crusts and scabs, which cover the broken blisters and take several more days to heal.
New bumps continue to appear for several days, so you may have all three stages of the rash — bumps, blisters and scabbed lesions — at the same time. You can spread the virus to other people for up to 48 hours before the rash appears, and the virus remains contagious until all broken blisters have crusted over.
The disease is generally mild in healthy children. In severe cases, the rash can cover the entire body, and lesions may form in the throat, eyes, and mucous membranes of the urethra, anus and vagina.
If you think you or your child might have chickenpox, consult your doctor. He or she usually can diagnose chickenpox by examining the rash and considering other symptoms. Your doctor can also prescribe medications to lessen the severity of chickenpox and treat complications, if necessary. To avoid infecting others in the waiting room, call ahead for an appointment and mention that you think you or your child may have chickenpox.
Also, let your doctor know if:
The rash spreads to one or both eyes.
The rash gets very red, warm or tender. This could indicate a secondary bacterial skin infection.
The rash is accompanied by dizziness, disorientation, rapid heartbeat, shortness of breath, tremors, loss of muscle coordination, worsening cough, vomiting, stiff neck or a fever higher than 102 F (38.9 C).
Anyone in the household has a problem with his or her immune system or is younger than 6 months.
Chickenpox infection is caused by a virus. It can spread through direct contact with the rash. It can also spread when a person with the chickenpox coughs or sneezes and you inhale the air droplets.
Your risk of becoming infected with the varicella-zoster virus that causes chickenpox is higher if you haven't already had chickenpox or if you haven't had the chickenpox vaccine. It's especially important for people who work in child care or school settings to be vaccinated.
Most people who have had chickenpox or have been vaccinated against chickenpox are immune to chickenpox. If you've been vaccinated and still get chickenpox, symptoms are often milder, with fewer blisters and mild or no fever. A few people can get chickenpox more than once, but this is rare.
Chickenpox is normally a mild disease. But it can be serious and can lead to complications including: Bacterial infections of the skin, soft tissues, bones, joints or bloodstream (sepsis), Dehydration, Pneumonia, Inflammation of the brain (encephalitis), Toxic shock syndrome, Reye's syndrome in children and teenagers who take aspirin during chickenpox, Death.
People who are at higher risk of chickenpox complications include: Newborns and infants whose mothers never had chickenpox or the vaccine, Adolescents and adults, Pregnant women who haven't had chickenpox, People who smoke, People whose immune systems are weakened by medication, such as chemotherapy, or by a disease, such as cancer or HIV, People who are taking steroid medications for another disease or condition, such as asthma.
Low birth weight and limb abnormalities are more common among babies born to women who are infected with chickenpox early in their pregnancy. When a mother is infected with chickenpox in the week before birth or within a couple of days after giving birth, her baby has a higher risk of developing a serious, life-threatening infection.
If you're pregnant and not immune to chickenpox, talk to your doctor about the risks to you and your unborn child.
If you've had chickenpox, you're at risk of a complication called shingles. The varicella-zoster virus remains in your nerve cells after the skin infection has healed. Many years later, the virus can reactivate and resurface as shingles — a painful cluster of short-lived blisters. The virus is more likely to reappear in older adults and people who have weakened immune systems.
The pain of shingles can persist long after the blisters disappear. This is called postherpetic neuralgia and can be severe.
Two shingles vaccines (Zostavax and Shingrix) are available for adults who have had chickenpox. Shingrix is approved and recommended for people age 50 and older, including those who've previously received Zostavax. Zostavax isn't recommended until age 60. Shingrix is preferred over Zostavax.
Signs and symptoms of chilblains may include: Small, itchy red areas on your skin, often on your feet or hands, Possible blistering or skin ulcers, Swelling of your skin, Burning sensation on your skin, Changes in skin color from red to dark blue, accompanied by pain.
Chilblains will usually get better on their own. Seek medical care to check for complications if the pain is unusually severe, if you suspect an infection, or if your symptoms aren't improving after one to two weeks. If the symptoms extend into the warm season, see a doctor to rule out other conditions.
If you have diabetes or poor circulation, healing may be impaired. Be cautious and seek care.
No one knows exactly what causes chilblains. They may be an abnormal reaction of your body to cold exposure followed by rewarming. Rewarming of cold skin can cause small blood vessels under the skin to expand more quickly than nearby larger blood vessels can handle. This results in a bottleneck effect and the blood leaking into nearby tissues.
Factors that may increase your risk of chilblains include:
Clothing that is tight or exposes skin to the cold. Wearing tight-fitting clothing and shoes in cold, damp weather may make you more susceptible to chilblains. And skin that's exposed to cold, damp conditions is more likely to develop chilblains.
Your sex. Women are more likely to get chilblains than are men.
Being underweight. People who weigh about 20 percent less than is expected for their height have an increased risk of chilblains.
Environment and season. Chilblains are less likely in colder and drier areas because the living conditions and clothing used in these areas are more protective against cold. Your risk of chilblains is higher if you live in an area with high humidity and cold, but not freezing, temperatures. They are more common from November to April.
Having poor circulation. People with poor circulation tend to be more sensitive to changes in temperature, making them more susceptible to chilblains.
Having Raynaud's disease. People with Raynaud's disease are more susceptible to chilblains. Either condition can result in sores, but Raynaud's causes different types of color changes on the skin.
Having an autoimmune disorder. Lupus — an autoimmune connective tissue disease — is the most common autoimmune disorder associated with chilblains.
Chilblains may cause complications if your skin blisters. If that happens, you may develop ulcers and infections. Besides being painful, infections are potentially life-threatening if left untreated. See a doctor if you suspect infection.
A child who's being abused may feel guilty, ashamed or confused. He or she may be afraid to tell anyone about the abuse, especially if the abuser is a parent, other relative or family friend. That's why it's vital to watch for red flags, such as: Withdrawal from friends or usual activities, Changes in behavior — such as aggression, anger, hostility or hyperactivity — or changes in school performance, Depression, anxiety or unusual fears, or a sudden loss of self-confidence, An apparent lack of supervision, Frequent absences from school, Reluctance to leave school activities, as if he or she doesn't want to go home, Attempts at running away, Rebellious or defiant behavior, Self-harm or attempts at suicide.
Specific signs and symptoms depend on the type of abuse and can vary. Keep in mind that warning signs are just that — warning signs. The presence of warning signs doesn't necessarily mean that a child is being abused. Unexplained injuries, such as bruises, fractures or burns, Injuries that don't match the given explanation.
Sexual behavior or knowledge that's inappropriate for the child's age, Pregnancy or a sexually transmitted infection, Blood in the child's underwear, Statements that he or she was sexually abused, Inappropriate sexual contact with other children.
Delayed or inappropriate emotional development, Loss of self-confidence or self-esteem, Social withdrawal or a loss of interest or enthusiasm, Depression, Avoidance of certain situations, such as refusing to go to school or ride the bus, Desperately seeks affection, A decrease in school performance or loss of interest in school, Loss of previously acquired developmental skills.
Poor growth or weight gain or being overweight, Poor hygiene, Lack of clothing or supplies to meet physical needs, Taking food or money without permission, Hiding food for later, Poor record of school attendance, Lack of appropriate attention for medical, dental or psychological problems or lack of necessary follow-up care.
Sometimes a parent's demeanor or behavior sends red flags about child abuse. Warning signs include a parent who: Shows little concern for the child, Appears unable to recognize physical or emotional distress in the child, Blames the child for the problems, Consistently belittles or berates the child, and describes the child with negative terms, such as "worthless" or "evil", Expects the child to provide him or her with attention and care and seems jealous of other family members getting attention from the child, Uses harsh physical discipline, Demands an inappropriate level of physical or academic performance, Severely limits the child's contact with others, Offers conflicting or unconvincing explanations for a child's injuries or no explanation at all.
Child health experts condemn the use of violence in any form, but some people still use corporal punishment, such as spanking, as a way to discipline their children. Any corporal punishment may leave emotional scars. Parental behaviors that cause pain, physical injury or emotional trauma — even when done in the name of discipline — could be child abuse.
If you're concerned that your child or another child has been abused, seek help immediately. Depending on the situation, contact the child's doctor or health care provider, a local child protective agency, the police department, or a 24-hour hotline such as Childhelp National Child Abuse Hotline (1-800-422-4453).
If the child needs immediate medical attention, call 911 or your local emergency number.
Keep in mind that health care professionals are legally required to report all suspected cases of child abuse to the appropriate county authorities or the police.
Factors that may increase a person's risk of becoming abusive include: A history of being abused or neglected as a child, Physical or mental illness, such as depression or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Family crisis or stress, including domestic violence and other marital conflicts, or single parenting, A child in the family who is developmentally or physically disabled, Financial stress, unemployment or poverty, Social or extended family isolation, Poor understanding of child development and parenting skills, Alcohol, drugs or other substance abuse.
Some children overcome the physical and psychological effects of child abuse, particularly those with strong social support and resiliency skills who can adapt and cope with bad experiences. For many others, however, child abuse may result in physical, behavioral, emotional or mental health issues — even years later. Below are some examples. Premature death, Physical disabilities, Learning disabilities, Substance abuse, Health problems, such as heart disease, immune disorders, chronic lung disease and cancer.
Delinquent or violent behavior, Abuse of others, Withdrawal, Suicide attempts or self-injury, High-risk sexual behaviors or teen pregnancy, Problems in school or not finishing high school, Limited social and relationship skills, Problems with work or staying employed.
Low self-esteem, Difficulty establishing or maintaining relationships, Challenges with intimacy and trust, An unhealthy view of parenthood, Inability to cope with stress and frustrations, An acceptance that violence is a normal part of relationships.
Eating disorders, Personality disorders, Behavior disorders, Depression, Anxiety disorders, Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Sleep disturbances, Attachment disorders.
Children with childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) may have many speech symptoms or characteristics that vary depending on their age and the severity of their speech problems.
CAS can be associated with: Delayed onset of first words, A limited number of spoken words, The ability to form only a few consonant or vowel sounds.
These symptoms are usually noticed between ages 18 months and 2 years, and may indicate suspected CAS.
As children produce more speech, usually between ages 2 and 4, characteristics that likely indicate CAS include: Vowel and consonant distortions, Separation of syllables in or between words, Voicing errors, such as "pie" sounding like "bye".
Many children with CAS have difficulty getting their jaws, lips and tongues to the correct positions to make a sound, and they may have difficulty moving smoothly to the next sound.
Many children with CAS also have language problems, such as reduced vocabulary or difficulty with word order.
Some symptoms may be unique to children with CAS and can be helpful to diagnose the problem. However, some symptoms of CAS are also symptoms of other types of speech or language disorders. It's difficult to diagnose CAS if a child has only symptoms that are found both in CAS and in other types of speech or language disorders.
Some characteristics, sometimes called markers, help distinguish CAS from other types of speech disorders. Those particularly associated with CAS include: Difficulty moving smoothly from one sound, syllable or word to another, Groping movements with the jaw, lips or tongue to make the correct movement for speech sounds, Vowel distortions, such as attempting to use the correct vowel, but saying it incorrectly, Using the wrong stress in a word, such as pronouncing "banana" as "BUH-nan-uh" instead of "buh-NAN-uh", Using equal emphasis on all syllables, such as saying "BUH-NAN-UH", Separation of syllables, such as putting a pause or gap between syllables, Inconsistency, such as making different errors when trying to say the same word a second time, Difficulty imitating simple words, Inconsistent voicing errors, such as saying "down" instead of "town".
Other characteristics are seen in most children with speech or language problems and aren't helpful in distinguishing CAS. Characteristics seen both in children with CAS and in children with other types of speech or language disorders include: Babbling less or making fewer vocal sounds than is typical between the ages of 7 to 12 months old, Speaking first words late (after ages 12 to 18 months old), Using a limited number of consonants and vowels, Frequently leaving out (omitting) sounds, Using speech that is difficult to understand speech.
Some speech sound disorders often get confused with CAS because some of the characteristics may overlap. These speech sound disorders include articulation disorders, phonological disorders and dysarthria.
A child who has trouble learning how to make specific sounds, but doesn't have trouble planning or coordinating the movements to speak, may have an articulation or phonological disorder. Articulation and phonological disorders are more common than CAS.
Articulation or phonological speech errors may include: Substituting sounds, such as saying "fum" instead of "thumb," "wabbit" instead of "rabbit" or "tup" instead of "cup", Leaving out (omitting) final consonants, such as saying "duh" instead of "duck" or "uh" instead of "up", Stopping the airstream, such as saying "tun" instead of "sun" or "doo" instead of "zoo", Simplifying sound combinations, such as saying "ting" instead of "string" or "fog" instead of "frog".
Dysarthria is a motor speech disorder that is due to weakness, spasticity or inability to control the speech muscles. Making speech sounds is difficult because the speech muscles can't move as far, as quickly or as strongly as normal. People with dysarthria may also have a hoarse, soft or even strained voice, or slurred or slow speech.
Dysarthria is often easier to identify than CAS. However, when dysarthria is caused by damage to certain areas of the brain that affect coordination, it can be difficult to determine the differences between CAS and dysarthria.
Childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) has a number of possible causes, but in many cases a cause can't be determined. Doctors often don't observe a problem in the brain of a child with CAS.
CAS may be the result of brain (neurological) conditions or injury, such as a stroke, infections or traumatic brain injury.
CAS may also occur as a symptom of a genetic disorder, syndrome or metabolic condition. For example, CAS occurs more frequently in children with galactosemia.
CAS is sometimes referred to as developmental apraxia. However, children with CAS don't necessarily grow out of CAS as they develop. In many children with delayed speech or developmental disorders, children follow usual patterns in development of speech and sounds, but they develop more slowly than usual.
Children with CAS don't make typical developmental sound errors. They need speech therapy to make maximum progress.
Abnormalities in the FOXP2 gene appear to increase the risk of childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) and other speech and language disorders. The FOXP2 gene may be involved in how certain nerves and pathways in the brain develop. Researchers continue to study how abnormalities in the FOXP2 gene may affect motor coordination and speech and language processing in the brain.
Many children with childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) have other problems that affect their ability to communicate. These problems aren't due to CAS, but they may be seen along with CAS.
Symptoms or problems that are often present along with CAS include: Delayed language, such as difficulty understanding speech, reduced vocabulary, or difficulty using correct grammar when putting words together in a phrase or sentence, Delays in intellectual and motor development and problems with reading, spelling and writing, Difficulties with gross and fine motor movement skills or coordination, Hypersensitivity, in which the child may not like some textures in clothing or the texture of certain foods, or the child may not like tooth brushing.
Common childhood asthma signs and symptoms include: Frequent coughing that worsens when your child has a viral infection, occurs while your child is asleep or is triggered by exercise or cold air, A whistling or wheezing sound when breathing out, Shortness of breath, Chest congestion or tightness.
Childhood asthma might also cause: Trouble sleeping due to shortness of breath, coughing or wheezing, Bouts of coughing or wheezing that get worse with a cold or the flu, Delayed recovery or bronchitis after a respiratory infection, Trouble breathing that hampers play or exercise, Fatigue, which can be due to poor sleep.
Asthma signs and symptoms vary from child to child, and might get worse or better over time. Your child might have only one indication, such as a lingering cough or chest congestion.
It can be difficult to tell whether your child's symptoms are caused by asthma. Periodic or long-lasting wheezing and other asthma-like symptoms can be caused by infectious bronchitis or another respiratory problem.
Take your child to see the doctor if you suspect he or she has asthma. Early treatment will help control symptoms and possibly prevent asthma attacks.
Make an appointment with your child's doctor if you notice: Coughing that is constant, is intermittent or seems linked to physical activity, Wheezing or whistling sounds when your child breathes out, Shortness of breath or rapid breathing, Complaints of chest tightness, Repeated episodes of suspected bronchitis or pneumonia.
If your child has asthma, he or she may say things such as, "My chest feels funny" or "I'm always coughing." Listen for coughing, which might not wake your child, when he or she is asleep. Crying, laughing, yelling, or strong emotional reactions and stress also might trigger coughing or wheezing.
If your child is diagnosed with asthma, creating an asthma plan can help you and other caregivers monitor symptoms and know what to do if an asthma attack occurs.
In severe cases, you might see your child's chest and sides pulling inward as he or she struggles to breathe. Your child might have an increased heartbeat, sweating and chest pain. Seek emergency care if your child: Has to stop in midsentence to catch his or her breath, Is using abdominal muscles to breathe, Has widened nostrils when breathing in, Is trying so hard to breathe that the abdomen is sucked under the ribs when he or she breathes in.
Even if your child hasn't been diagnosed with asthma, seek medical attention immediately if he or she has trouble breathing. Although episodes of asthma vary in severity, asthma attacks can start with coughing, which progresses to wheezing and labored breathing.
Childhood asthma causes aren't fully understood. Some factors thought to be involved include: Inherited tendency to develop allergies, Parents with asthma, Some types of airway infections at a very young age, Exposure to environmental factors, such as cigarette smoke or other air pollution.
Increased immune system sensitivity causes the lungs and airways to swell and produce mucus when exposed to certain triggers. Reaction to a trigger can be delayed, making it more difficult to identify the trigger. Triggers vary from child to child and can include: Viral infections such as the common cold, Exposure to air pollutants, such as tobacco smoke, Allergies to dust mites, pet dander, pollen or mold, Physical activity, Weather changes or cold air.
Sometimes, asthma symptoms occur with no apparent triggers.
Factors that might increase your child's likelihood of developing asthma include: Exposure to tobacco smoke, including before birth, Previous allergic reactions, including skin reactions, food allergies or hay fever (allergic rhinitis), A family history of asthma or allergies, Living in an area with high pollution, Obesity, Respiratory conditions, such as a chronic runny or stuffy nose (rhinitis), inflamed sinuses (sinusitis) or pneumonia, Heartburn (gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD), Being male, Being black or Puerto Rican.
Asthma can cause a number of complications, including: Severe asthma attacks that require emergency treatment or hospital care, Permanent decline in lung function, Missed school days or getting behind in school, Poor sleep and fatigue, Symptoms that interfere with play, sports or other activities.
Not all children carrying extra pounds are overweight or obese. Some children have larger than average body frames. And children normally carry different amounts of body fat at the various stages of development. So you might not know by how your child looks if weight is a health concern.
The body mass index (BMI), which provides a guideline of weight in relation to height, is the accepted measure of overweight and obesity. Your child's doctor can use growth charts, the BMI and, if necessary, other tests to help you figure out if your child's weight could pose health problems.
If you're worried that your child is putting on too much weight, talk to his or her doctor. The doctor will consider your child's history of growth and development, your family's weight-for-height history, and where your child lands on the growth charts. This can help determine if your child's weight is in an unhealthy range.
Lifestyle issues — too little activity and too many calories from food and drinks — are the main contributors to childhood obesity. But genetic and hormonal factors might play a role as well. For example, recent research has found that changes in digestive hormones can affect the signals that let you know you're full.
Many factors — usually working in combination — increase your child's risk of becoming overweight:
Diet. Regularly eating high-calorie foods, such as fast foods, baked goods and vending machine snacks, can cause your child to gain weight. Candy and desserts also can cause weight gain, and more and more evidence points to sugary drinks, including fruit juices, as culprits in obesity in some people.
Lack of exercise. Children who don't exercise much are more likely to gain weight because they don't burn as many calories. Too much time spent in sedentary activities, such as watching television or playing video games, also contributes to the problem.
Family factors. If your child comes from a family of overweight people, he or she may be more likely to put on weight. This is especially true in an environment where high-calorie foods are always available and physical activity isn't encouraged.
Psychological factors. Personal, parental and family stress can increase a child's risk of obesity. Some children overeat to cope with problems or to deal with emotions, such as stress, or to fight boredom. Their parents might have similar tendencies.
Socioeconomic factors. People in some communities have limited resources and limited access to supermarkets. As a result, they might buy convenience foods that don't spoil quickly, such as frozen meals, crackers and cookies. Also, people who live in lower income neighborhoods might not have access to a safe place to exercise.
Childhood obesity can have complications for your child's physical, social and emotional well-being.
Type 2 diabetes. This chronic condition affects the way your child's body uses sugar (glucose). Obesity and a sedentary lifestyle increase the risk of type 2 diabetes.
Metabolic syndrome. This cluster of conditions can put your child at risk of heart disease, diabetes or other health problems. Conditions include high blood pressure, high blood sugar, high triglycerides, low HDL ("good") cholesterol and excess abdominal fat.
High cholesterol and high blood pressure. A poor diet can cause your child to develop one or both of these conditions. These factors can contribute to the buildup of plaques in the arteries, which can cause arteries to narrow and harden, possibly leading to a heart attack or stroke later in life.
Asthma. Children who are overweight or obese might be more likely to have asthma.
Sleep disorders. Obstructive sleep apnea is a potentially serious disorder in which a child's breathing repeatedly stops and starts during sleep.
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). This disorder, which usually causes no symptoms, causes fatty deposits to build up in the liver. NAFLD can lead to scarring and liver damage.
Bone fractures. Obese children are more likely to break bones than are children of normal weight.
Low self-esteem and being bullied. Children often tease or bully their overweight peers, who suffer a loss of self-esteem and an increased risk of depression as a result.
Behavior and learning problems. Overweight children tend to have more anxiety and poorer social skills than normal-weight children do. These problems might lead children who are overweight either to act out and disrupt their classrooms or to withdraw socially.
Depression. Low self-esteem can create overwhelming feelings of hopelessness, which can lead to depression in some children who are overweight.
Schizophrenia involves a range of problems with thinking, behavior or emotions. Signs and symptoms may vary, but usually involve delusions, hallucinations or disorganized speech, and reflect an impaired ability to function. The effect can be disabling.
Schizophrenia symptoms generally start in the mid- to late 20s. It's uncommon for children to be diagnosed with schizophrenia. Early-onset schizophrenia occurs before age 18. Very early-onset schizophrenia in children younger than age 13 is extremely rare.
Symptoms can vary in type and severity over time, with periods of worsening and remission of symptoms. Some symptoms may always be present. Schizophrenia can be difficult to recognize in the early phases.
The earliest indications of childhood schizophrenia may include developmental problems, such as: Language delays, Late or unusual crawling, Late walking, Other abnormal motor behaviors — for example, rocking or arm flapping.
Some of these signs and symptoms are also common in children with pervasive developmental disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder. So ruling out these developmental disorders is one of the first steps in diagnosis.
Schizophrenia symptoms in teenagers are similar to those in adults, but the condition may be more difficult to recognize in this age group. This may be in part because some of the early symptoms of schizophrenia in teenagers are common for typical development during teen years, such as: Withdrawal from friends and family, A drop in performance at school, Trouble sleeping, Irritability or depressed mood, Lack of motivation, Strange behavior, Substance use.
Compared with schizophrenia symptoms in adults, teens may be: Less likely to have delusions, More likely to have visual hallucinations.
As children with schizophrenia age, more typical signs and symptoms of the disorder begin to appear. Signs and symptoms may include:
Delusions. These are false beliefs that are not based in reality. For example, you think that you're being harmed or harassed; that certain gestures or comments are directed at you; that you have exceptional ability or fame; that another person is in love with you; or that a major catastrophe is about to occur. Delusions occur in most people with schizophrenia.
Hallucinations. These usually involve seeing or hearing things that don't exist. Yet for the person with schizophrenia, hallucinations have the full force and impact of a normal experience. Hallucinations can be in any of the senses, but hearing voices is the most common hallucination.
Disorganized thinking. Disorganized thinking is inferred from disorganized speech. Effective communication can be impaired, and answers to questions may be partially or completely unrelated. Rarely, speech may include putting together meaningless words that can't be understood, sometimes known as word salad.
Extremely disorganized or abnormal motor behavior. This may show in several ways, from childlike silliness to unpredictable agitation. Behavior is not focused on a goal, which makes it hard to do tasks. Behavior can include resistance to instructions, inappropriate or bizarre posture, a complete lack of response, or useless and excessive movement.
Negative symptoms. This refers to reduced or lack of ability to function normally. For example, the person may neglect personal hygiene or appear to lack emotion ― doesn't make eye contact, doesn't change facial expressions, speaks in a monotone, or doesn't add hand or head movements that normally occur when speaking. Also, the person may have reduced ability to engage in activities, such as a loss of interest in everyday activities, social withdrawal or lack ability to experience pleasure.
When childhood schizophrenia begins early in life, symptoms may build up gradually. The early signs and symptoms may be so vague that you can't recognize what's wrong, or you may attribute them to a developmental phase.
As time goes on, symptoms may become more severe and more noticeable. Eventually, your child may develop the symptoms of psychosis, including hallucinations, delusions and difficulty organizing thoughts. As thoughts become more disorganized, there's often a "break from reality" (psychosis) frequently requiring hospitalization and treatment with medication.
When to see a doctor
It can be difficult to know how to handle vague behavioral changes in your child. You may be afraid of rushing to conclusions that label your child with a mental illness. Your child's teacher or other school staff may alert you to changes in your child's behavior.
Seek medical advice if your child: Has developmental delays compared with other siblings or peers, Has stopped meeting daily expectations, such as bathing or dressing, No longer wants to socialize, Is slipping in academic performance, Has strange eating rituals, Shows excessive suspicion of others, Shows a lack of emotion or shows emotions inappropriate for the situation, Has strange ideas and fears, Confuses dreams or television for reality, Has bizarre ideas, behavior or speech, Has violent or aggressive behavior or agitation.
These general signs and symptoms don't necessarily mean your child has childhood schizophrenia. These could indicate a phase, another mental health disorder such as depression or an anxiety disorder, or a medical condition. Seek medical care as soon as possible if you have concerns about your child's behavior or development.
Suicidal thoughts and behavior are common among people with schizophrenia. If you have a child or teen who is in danger of attempting suicide or has made a suicide attempt, make sure someone stays with him or her. Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately. Or if you think you can do so safely, take your child to the nearest hospital emergency room.
It's not known what causes childhood schizophrenia, but it's thought that it develops in the same way as adult schizophrenia does. Researchers believe that a combination of genetics, brain chemistry and environment contributes to development of the disorder. It's not clear why schizophrenia starts so early in life for some and not for others.
Problems with certain naturally occurring brain chemicals, including neurotransmitters called dopamine and glutamate, may contribute to schizophrenia. Neuroimaging studies show differences in the brain structure and central nervous system of people with schizophrenia. While researchers aren't certain about the significance of these changes, they indicate that schizophrenia is a brain disease.
Although the precise cause of schizophrenia isn't known, certain factors seem to increase the risk of developing or triggering schizophrenia, including: Having a family history of schizophrenia, Increased immune system activation, such as from inflammation or autoimmune diseases, Older age of the father, Some pregnancy and birth complications, such as malnutrition or exposure to toxins or viruses that may impact brain development, Taking mind-altering (psychoactive or psychoactive) drugs during teen years.
Left untreated, childhood schizophrenia can result in severe emotional, behavioral and health problems. Complications associated with schizophrenia may occur in childhood or later, such as: Suicide, suicide attempts and thoughts of suicide, Self-injury, Anxiety disorders, panic disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), Depression, Abuse of alcohol or other drugs, including tobacco, Family conflicts, Inability to live independently, attend school or work, Social isolation, Health and medical problems, Being victimized, Legal and financial problems, and homelessness, Aggressive behavior, although uncommon.
Early-stage Chlamydia trachomatis infections often cause few or no signs and symptoms. Even when signs and symptoms occur, they're often mild, making them easy to overlook.
Signs and symptoms of Chlamydia trachomatis infection can include: Painful urination, Vaginal discharge in women, Discharge from the penis in men, Painful sexual intercourse in women, Bleeding between periods and after sex in women, Testicular pain in men.
Chlamydia trachomatis can also infect the rectum, either with no signs or symptoms or with rectal pain, discharge or bleeding. You also can get chlamydial eye infections (conjunctivitis) through contact with infected body fluids.
See your doctor if you have a discharge from your vagina, penis or rectum, or if you have pain during urination. Also, see your doctor if you learn your sexual partner has chlamydia. Your doctor will likely prescribe an antibiotic even if you have no symptoms.
The Chlamydia trachomatis bacterium is most commonly spread through vaginal, oral and anal sex. It's also possible for pregnant women to spread chlamydia to their children during delivery, causing pneumonia or a serious eye infection in the newborns.
Factors that increase your risk of Chlamydia trachomatis include: Being sexually active before age 25, Having multiple sex partners, Not using a condom consistently, History of sexually transmitted infection.
Chlamydia trachomatis can be associated with:
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). PID is an infection of the uterus and fallopian tubes that causes pelvic pain and fever. Severe infections might require hospitalization for intravenous antibiotics. PID can damage the fallopian tubes, ovaries and uterus, including the cervix.
Infection near the testicles (epididymitis). A chlamydia infection can inflame the coiled tube located beside each testicle (epididymis). The infection can result in fever, scrotal pain and swelling.
Prostate gland infection. Rarely, the chlamydia organism can spread to a man's prostate gland. Prostatitis can cause pain during or after sex, fever and chills, painful urination, and lower back pain.
Infections in newborns. The chlamydia infection can pass from the vaginal canal to your child during delivery, causing pneumonia or a serious eye infection.
Ectopic pregnancy. This occurs when a fertilized egg implants and grows outside of the uterus, usually in a fallopian tube. The pregnancy needs to be removed to prevent life-threatening complications, such as a burst tube. A chlamydia infection increases this risk.
Infertility. Chlamydia infections — even those that produce no signs or symptoms — can cause scarring and obstruction in the fallopian tubes, which might make women infertile.
Reactive arthritis. People who have Chlamydia trachomatis are at higher risk of developing reactive arthritis, also known as Reiter's syndrome. This condition typically affects the joints, eyes and urethra — the tube that carries urine from your bladder to outside of your body.
Signs and symptoms of cholecystitis may include: Severe pain in your upper right or center abdomen, Pain that spreads to your right shoulder or back, Tenderness over your abdomen when it's touched, Nausea, Vomiting, Fever.
Cholecystitis signs and symptoms often occur after a meal, particularly a large or fatty one.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have worrisome signs or symptoms. If your abdominal pain is so severe that you can't sit still or get comfortable, have someone drive you to the emergency room.
Cholecystitis occurs when your gallbladder becomes inflamed. Gallbladder inflammation can be caused by:
Gallstones. Most often, cholecystitis is the result of hard particles that develop in your gallbladder (gallstones). Gallstones can block the tube (cystic duct) through which bile flows when it leaves the gallbladder. Bile builds up, causing inflammation.
Tumor. A tumor may prevent bile from draining out of your gallbladder properly, causing bile buildup that can lead to cholecystitis.
Bile duct blockage. Kinking or scarring of the bile ducts can cause blockages that lead to cholecystitis.
Infection. AIDS and certain viral infections can trigger gallbladder inflammation.
Blood vessel problems. A very severe illness can damage blood vessels and decrease blood flow to the gallbladder, leading to cholecystitis.
Having gallstones is the main risk factor for developing cholecystitis.
Cholecystitis can lead to a number of serious complications, including:
Infection within the gallbladder. If bile builds up within your gallbladder, causing cholecystitis, the bile may become infected.
Death of gallbladder tissue. Untreated cholecystitis can cause tissue in the gallbladder to die (gangrene). It's the most common complication, especially among older people, those who wait to get treatment, and those with diabetes. This can lead to a tear in the gallbladder, or it may cause your gallbladder to burst.
Torn gallbladder. A tear (perforation) in your gallbladder may result from gallbladder swelling, infection or death of tissue.
Most people exposed to the cholera bacterium (Vibrio cholerae) don't become ill and don't know they've been infected. But because they shed cholera bacteria in their stool for seven to 14 days, they can still infect others through contaminated water.
Most cases of cholera that cause symptoms cause mild or moderate diarrhea that's often hard to tell apart from diarrhea caused by other problems. Others develop more-serious signs and symptoms of cholera, usually within a few days of infection.
Symptoms of cholera infection can include:
Diarrhea. Cholera-related diarrhea comes on suddenly and can quickly cause dangerous fluid loss — as much as a quart (about 1 liter) an hour. Diarrhea due to cholera often has a pale, milky appearance that resembles water in which rice has been rinsed.
Nausea and vomiting. Vomiting occurs especially in the early stages of cholera and can last for hours.
Dehydration. Dehydration can develop within hours after cholera symptoms start and range from mild to severe. A loss of 10% or more of body weight indicates severe dehydration.
Signs and symptoms of cholera dehydration include irritability, fatigue, sunken eyes, a dry mouth, extreme thirst, dry and shriveled skin that's slow to bounce back when pinched into a fold, little or no urinating, low blood pressure, and an irregular heartbeat.
Dehydration can lead to a rapid loss of minerals in your blood that maintain the balance of fluids in your body. This is called an electrolyte imbalance.
An electrolyte imbalance can lead to serious signs and symptoms such as:
Muscle cramps. These result from the rapid loss of salts such as sodium, chloride and potassium.
Shock. This is one of the most serious complications of dehydration. It occurs when low blood volume causes a drop in blood pressure and a drop in the amount of oxygen in your body. If untreated, severe hypovolemic shock can cause death in minutes.
The risk of cholera is slight in industrialized nations. Even in areas where it exists you're not likely to become infected if you follow food safety recommendations. Still, cases of cholera occur throughout the world. If you develop severe diarrhea after visiting an area with active cholera, see your doctor.
If you have diarrhea, especially severe diarrhea, and think you might have been exposed to cholera, seek treatment right away. Severe dehydration is a medical emergency that requires immediate care.
A bacterium called Vibrio cholerae causes cholera infection. The deadly effects of the disease are the result of a toxin the bacteria produces in the small intestine. The toxin causes the body to secrete enormous amounts of water, leading to diarrhea and a rapid loss of fluids and salts (electrolytes).
Cholera bacteria might not cause illness in all people who are exposed to them, but they still pass the bacteria in their stool, which can contaminate food and water supplies.
Contaminated water supplies are the main source of cholera infection. The bacterium can be found in:
Surface or well water. Contaminated public wells are frequent sources of large-scale cholera outbreaks. People living in crowded conditions without adequate sanitation are especially at risk.
Seafood. Eating raw or undercooked seafood, especially shellfish, that comes from certain places can expose you to cholera bacteria. Most recent cases of cholera in the United States have been traced to seafood from the Gulf of Mexico.
Raw fruits and vegetables. Raw, unpeeled fruits and vegetables are a frequent source of cholera infection in areas where there's cholera. In developing countries, uncomposted manure fertilizers or irrigation water containing raw sewage can contaminate produce in the field.
Grains. In regions where cholera is widespread, grains such as rice and millet that are contaminated after cooking and kept at room temperature for several hours can grow cholera bacteria.
Everyone is susceptible to cholera, with the exception of infants who get immunity from nursing mothers who have previously had cholera. Still, certain factors can make you more vulnerable to the disease or more likely to have severe signs and symptoms.
Risk factors for cholera include:
Poor sanitary conditions. Cholera is more likely to flourish in situations where a sanitary environment — including a safe water supply — is difficult to maintain. Such conditions are common to refugee camps, impoverished countries, and areas afflicted by famine, war or natural disasters.
Reduced or nonexistent stomach acid. Cholera bacteria can't survive in an acidic environment, and ordinary stomach acid often serves as a defense against infection. But people with low levels of stomach acid — such as children, older adults, and people who take antacids, H-2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors — lack this protection, so they're at greater risk of cholera.
Household exposure. You're at increased risk of cholera if you live with someone who has the disease.
Type O blood. For reasons that aren't entirely clear, people with type O blood are twice as likely to develop cholera compared with people with other blood types.
Raw or undercooked shellfish. Although industrialized nations no longer have large-scale cholera outbreaks, eating shellfish from waters known to harbor the bacteria greatly increases your risk.
Cholera can quickly become fatal. In the most severe cases, the rapid loss of large amounts of fluids and electrolytes can lead to death within hours. In less extreme situations, people who don't receive treatment can die of dehydration and shock hours to days after cholera symptoms first appear.
Although shock and severe dehydration are the worst complications of cholera, other problems can occur, such as:
Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). Dangerously low levels of blood sugar (glucose) — the body's main energy source — can occur when people become too ill to eat. Children are at greatest risk of this complication, which can cause seizures, unconsciousness and even death.
Low potassium levels. People with cholera lose large quantities of minerals, including potassium, in their stools. Very low potassium levels interfere with heart and nerve function and are life-threatening.
Kidney failure. When the kidneys lose their filtering ability, excess amounts of fluids, some electrolytes and wastes build up in the body — a potentially life-threatening condition. In people with cholera, kidney failure often accompanies shock.
Intense itching is the main symptom of cholestasis of pregnancy. There is no rash. Most women feel itchy on the palms of their hands or the soles of their feet, but some women feel itchy everywhere. The itching is often worse at night and may be so bothersome that you can't sleep.
The itching is most common during the third trimester of pregnancy but sometimes begins earlier. It may feel worse as your due date approaches. Once your baby arrives, however, the itchiness usually goes away within a few days.
Other less common signs and symptoms of cholestasis of pregnancy may include: Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), Nausea, Loss of appetite.
Contact your pregnancy care provider immediately if you begin to feel persistent or extreme itchiness.
The cause of cholestasis of pregnancy is unclear. Your genes may play a role. Sometimes, the condition runs in families. Certain genetic variants have also been identified.
Pregnancy hormones also may be involved. Pregnancy hormones rise the closer you get to your due date. Doctors think this may slow the normal flow of bile — the digestive fluid made in the liver that helps your digestive system break down fats. Instead of leaving the liver, bile builds up in the organ. As a result, bile salts eventually enter the bloodstream, which can make you feel itchy.
Some factors that may increase your risk of developing cholestasis of pregnancy include: Personal or family history of cholestasis of pregnancy, History of liver damage or disease, Being pregnant with twins or more.
If you have a history of cholestasis in a prior pregnancy, your risk of developing it during a future pregnancy is high. About 60 to 75 percent of women have a recurrence.
Complications from cholestasis of pregnancy may occur in the mom or the developing baby.
In moms, the condition may temporarily affect the way the body absorbs fat. Poor absorption of fat could result in decreased levels of vitamin K-dependent factors involved with blood clotting. But this complication is rare, and future liver problems are uncommon.
In babies, the complications of cholestasis of pregnancy can be severe. They may include: Being born too early (preterm birth), Lung problems from breathing in meconium — the sticky, green substance that normally collects in the developing baby's intestines but which may pass into the amniotic fluid if a mom has cholestasis, Death of the baby late in pregnancy before delivery (stillbirth).
Because complications can be very dangerous for your baby, your doctor may consider inducing labor before your due date.
Chondrosarcoma signs and symptoms may include: Increasing pain, A swelling or palpable mass, Fracture due to weakened bone.
If the tumor is pressing on the spinal cord, you might experience weakness, numbness or incontinence.
Chondrosarcoma is associated with certain genetic mutations. Some varieties of chondrosarcoma arise from the transformation of benign cartilage lesions into cancers.
While chondrosarcoma can occur at any age, the most prevalent variety typically affects middle-aged to older adults.
Ollier disease and Mafucci syndrome are conditions marked by an increased number of benign cartilage lesions (enchondromas) in the body. These lesions sometimes transform into chondrosarcoma.
A chronic cough can occur with other signs and symptoms, which may include: A runny or stuffy nose, A feeling of liquid running down the back of your throat (postnasal drip), Frequent throat clearing and sore throat, Hoarseness, Wheezing and shortness of breath, Heartburn or a sour taste in your mouth, In rare cases, coughing up blood.
See your doctor if you have a cough that lingers for weeks, especially one that brings up sputum or blood, disturbs your sleep, or affects school or work.
An occasional cough is normal — it helps clear irritants and secretions from your lungs and prevents infection.
However, a cough that persists for weeks is usually the result of a medical problem. In many cases, more than one cause is involved.
The following causes, alone or in combination, are responsible for the majority of cases of chronic cough:
Postnasal drip. When your nose or sinuses produce extra mucus, it can drip down the back of your throat and trigger your cough reflex. This condition is also called upper airway cough syndrome (UACS).
Asthma. An asthma-related cough may come and go with the seasons, appear after an upper respiratory tract infection, or become worse when you're exposed to cold air or certain chemicals or fragrances. In one type of asthma (cough-variant asthma), a cough is the main symptom.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). In this common condition, stomach acid flows back into the tube that connects your stomach and throat (esophagus). The constant irritation can lead to chronic coughing. The coughing, in turn, worsens GERD — a vicious cycle.
Infections. A cough can linger long after other symptoms of pneumonia, flu, a cold or other infection of the upper respiratory tract have gone away. A common but under-recognized cause of a chronic cough in adults is pertussis, also known as whooping cough. Chronic cough can also occur with fungal infections of the lung, tuberculosis (TB) infection or lung infection with nontuberculous mycobacterial organisms.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). COPD, a chronic inflammatory lung disease that causes obstructed airflow from the lungs, includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Chronic bronchitis can cause a cough that brings up colored sputum. Emphysema causes shortness of breath and damages the air sacs in the lungs (alveoli). Most people with COPD are current or former smokers.
Blood pressure drugs. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, which are commonly prescribed for high blood pressure and heart failure, are known to cause chronic cough in some people.
Less commonly, chronic cough may be caused by: Aspiration (food in adults; foreign bodies in children), Bronchiectasis (damaged, dilated airways), Bronchiolitis (inflammation of the very small airways of the lung), Cystic fibrosis, Laryngopharyngeal reflux (stomach acid flows up into the throat), Lung cancer, Nonasthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis (airway inflammation not caused by asthma), Sarcoidosis (collections of inflammatory cells in different parts of your body, most commonly the lungs), Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (chronic scarring of the lungs due to an unknown cause).
Being a current or former smoker is one of the leading risk factors for chronic cough. Frequent exposure to secondhand smoke also can lead to coughing and lung damage.
Having a persistent cough can be exhausting. Coughing can cause a variety of problems, including: Sleep disruption, Headache, Dizziness, Vomiting, Excessive sweating, Loss of bladder control (urinary incontinence), Fractured ribs, Passing out (syncope).
By definition, chronic daily headaches occur 15 days or more a month, for longer than three months. True (primary) chronic daily headaches aren't caused by another condition.
There are short-lasting and long-lasting chronic daily headaches. Long-lasting headaches last more than four hours. They include: Chronic migraine, Chronic tension-type headache, New daily persistent headache, Hemicrania continua.
This type typically occurs in people with a history of episodic migraines. Chronic migraines tend to: Affect one side or both sides of your head, Have a pulsating, throbbing sensation, Cause moderate to severe pain.
And they cause at least one of the following: Nausea, vomiting or both, Sensitivity to light and sound.
These headaches tend to: Affect both sides of your head, Cause mild to moderate pain, Cause pain that feels pressing or tightening, but not pulsating.
These headaches come on suddenly, usually in people without a headache history. They become constant within three days of your first headache. They: Often affect both sides of your head, Cause pain that feels like pressing or tightening, but not pulsating, Cause mild to moderate pain, Might have features of chronic migraine or chronic tension-type headache.
These headaches: Affect only one side of your head, Are daily and continuous with no pain-free periods, Cause moderate pain with spikes of severe pain, Respond to the prescription pain reliever indomethacin (Indocin), Can become severe with development of migraine-like symptoms.
In addition, hemicrania continua headaches are associated with at least one of the following: Tearing or redness of the eye on the affected side, Nasal congestion or runny nose, Drooping eyelid or pupil narrowing, Sensation of restlessness.
Occasional headaches are common, and usually require no medical attention. However, consult your doctor if: You usually have two or more headaches a week, You take a pain reliever for your headaches most days, You need more than the recommended dose of over-the-counter pain remedies to relieve your headaches, Your headache pattern changes or your headaches worsen, Your headaches are disabling.
Seek prompt medical care if your headache: Is sudden and severe, Accompanies a fever, stiff neck, confusion, seizure, double vision, weakness, numbness or difficulty speaking, Follows a head injury, Gets worse despite rest and pain medication.
The causes of many chronic daily headaches aren't well-understood. True (primary) chronic daily headaches don't have an identifiable underlying cause.
Conditions that might cause nonprimary chronic daily headaches include: Inflammation or other problems with the blood vessels in and around the brain, including stroke, Infections, such as meningitis, Intracranial pressure that's either too high or too low, Brain tumor, Traumatic brain injury.
This type of headache usually develops in people who have an episodic headache disorder, usually migraine or tension type, and take too much pain medication. If you're taking pain medications — even over-the-counter — more than two days a week (or nine days a month), you're at risk of developing rebound headaches.
Factors associated with developing frequent headaches include: Female sex, Anxiety, Depression, Sleep disturbances, Obesity, Snoring, Overuse of caffeine, Overuse of headache medication, Other chronic pain conditions.
If you have chronic daily headaches, you're also more likely to have depression, anxiety, sleep disturbances, and other psychological and physical problems.
The signs and symptoms associated with chronic exertional compartment syndrome can include: Aching, burning or cramping pain in a specific area (compartment) of the affected limb — usually the lower leg, Tightness in the affected limb, Numbness or tingling in the affected limb, Weakness of the affected limb, Foot drop, in severe cases, if legs are affected, Often occurs in the same compartment of both legs, Occasionally, swelling or bulging as a result of a muscle hernia.
Pain caused by chronic exertional compartment syndrome typically follows this pattern: Begins consistently after a certain time, distance or intensity of exertion after you start exercising the affected limb, Progressively worsens as you exercise, Becomes less intense or stops completely within 15 minutes of stopping the activity, Over time, recovery time after exercise may increase.
Taking a complete break from exercise or performing only low-impact activity might relieve your symptoms, but usually only temporarily. Once you take up running again, for instance, those familiar symptoms usually come back.
If you have recurring unusual pain, swelling, weakness, loss of sensation or soreness while exercising or practicing sports activities, talk to your doctor. Sometimes chronic exertional compartment syndrome is mistaken for shin splints, a more common cause of leg pain in young people who do a lot of vigorous weight-bearing activity, such as running. If you think you have shin splints and the pain doesn't get better with self-care, talk to your doctor.
The cause of chronic exertional compartment syndrome isn't completely understood. When you exercise, your muscles expand in volume. If you have chronic exertional compartment syndrome, the tissue that encases the affected muscle (fascia) doesn't expand with the muscle, causing pressure and pain in a specific area (compartment) of the affected limb.
Some experts suggest that how you move while exercising (your gait) might have a role in causing chronic exertional compartment syndrome. Other causes might include having muscles that enlarge excessively during exercise, having an especially inflexible fascia surrounding the affected muscle compartment, or having high pressure within your veins.
Certain factors increase your risk of developing chronic exertional compartment syndrome, including:
Age. Although people of any age can develop chronic exertional compartment syndrome, the condition is most common in male and female athletes under age 30.
Type of exercise. Repetitive impact activity — such as running — increases your risk of developing the condition.
Overtraining. Working out too intensely or too frequently also can raise your risk of chronic exertional compartment syndrome.
Chronic exertional compartment syndrome isn't a life-threatening condition and usually doesn't cause lasting damage if you get appropriate treatment. However, pain, weakness or numbness associated with chronic exertional compartment syndrome may prevent you from continuing to exercise or practice your sport at the same level of intensity.
Symptoms of chronic fatigue syndrome can vary from person to person, and the severity of symptoms can fluctuate from day to day. Signs and symptoms may include: Fatigue, Problems with memory or concentration, Sore throat, Headaches, Enlarged lymph nodes in your neck or armpits, Unexplained muscle or joint pain, Dizziness that worsens with moving from lying down or sitting to standing, Unrefreshing sleep, Extreme exhaustion after physical or mental exercise.
Fatigue can be a symptom of many illnesses, such as infections or psychological disorders. In general, see your doctor if you have persistent or excessive fatigue.
The cause of chronic fatigue syndrome is still unknown. Some people may be born with a predisposition for the disorder, which is then triggered by a combination of factors. Potential triggers include:
Viral infections. Because some people develop chronic fatigue syndrome after having a viral infection, researchers question whether some viruses might trigger the disorder. Suspicious viruses include the Epstein-Barr virus, human herpes virus 6. No conclusive link has yet been found.
Immune system problems. The immune systems of people who have chronic fatigue syndrome appear to be impaired slightly, but it's unclear if this impairment is enough to actually cause the disorder.
Hormonal imbalances. People who have chronic fatigue syndrome also sometimes experience abnormal blood levels of hormones produced in the hypothalamus, pituitary glands or adrenal glands. But the significance of these abnormalities is still unknown.
Physical or emotional trauma. Some people report that they experienced an injury, surgery or significant emotional stress shortly before their symptoms began.
Factors that may increase your risk of chronic fatigue syndrome include:
Age. Chronic fatigue syndrome can occur at any age, but it most commonly affects young to middle-aged adults.
Sex. Women are diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome much more often than men, but it may be that women are simply more likely to report their symptoms to a doctor.
Possible complications of chronic fatigue syndrome include: Lifestyle restrictions, Increased work absences, Social isolation, Depression.
People with chronic granulomatous disease experience serious bacterial or fungal infection every few years. An infection in the lungs, including pneumonia, is common. People with CGD may develop a serious type of fungal pneumonia after being exposed to dead leaves, mulch or hay.
It's also common for people with CGD to experience infections of the skin, liver, stomach and intestines, brain, and eyes. Signs and symptoms associated with infections include: Fever, Chest pain when inhaling or exhaling, Swollen and sore lymph glands, A persistent runny nose, Skin irritation that may include a rash, swelling or redness, Swelling and redness in your mouth, Gastrointestinal problems that may include vomiting, diarrhea, stomach pain, bloody stool or a painful pocket of pus near the anus.
If you think you or your child has a type of fungal pneumonia from being around dead leaves, mulch or hay, get medical care right away. If you or your child has frequent infections and the signs and symptoms listed above, talk to your doctor.
A mutation in one of five genes can cause CGD. People with CGD inherit the gene mutation from a parent. The genes normally produce proteins that form an enzyme that helps your immune system work properly. The enzyme is active in white blood cells (phagocytes) that catch and destroy fungi and bacteria to protect you from infections. The enzyme is also active in immune cells that help your body heal.
When there are mutations to one of these genes, the protective proteins are not produced, or they're produced but they don't function properly.
Some people with CGD don't have one of these gene mutations. In these cases, doctors don't know what causes the condition.
Signs and symptoms of chronic hives include: Batches of red or skin-colored welts (wheals), which can appear anywhere on the body, Welts that vary in size, change shape, and appear and fade repeatedly as the reaction runs its course, Itching, which may be severe, Painful swelling (angioedema) of the lips, eyelids and inside the throat, A tendency for signs and symptoms to flare with triggers such as heat, exercise and stress, A tendency for signs and symptoms to persist for more than six weeks and to recur frequently and unpredictably, sometimes for months or years.
Short-term (acute) hives appear suddenly and clear up within a few weeks.
See your doctor if you have severe hives or hives that continue to appear for several days.
Chronic hives don't put you at any sudden risk of a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis). If you do experience hives as part of a serious allergic reaction, seek emergency care. Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include dizziness, trouble breathing, and swelling of your lips, eyelids and tongue.
The welts that come with hives arise when certain cells release histamine and other chemicals into your bloodstream.
Doctors often can't identify the reason for chronic hives or why acute hives sometimes turn into a long-term problem. The skin reaction may be triggered by: Pain medications, Insects or parasites, Infection, Scratching, Heat or cold, Stress, Sunlight, Exercise, Alcohol or food, Pressure on the skin, as from a tight waistband.
In some cases, chronic hives may be related to an underlying illness, such as a thyroid disease or, rarely, cancer.
Chronic hives don't put you at any sudden risk of a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis). But if you do experience hives as part of a serious allergic reaction, seek emergency care. Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include dizziness, trouble breathing, and swelling of your lips, eyelids and tongue.
Signs and symptoms of chronic kidney disease develop over time if kidney damage progresses slowly. Signs and symptoms of kidney disease may include: Nausea, Vomiting, Loss of appetite, Fatigue and weakness, Sleep problems, Changes in how much you urinate, Decreased mental sharpness, Muscle twitches and cramps, Swelling of feet and ankles, Persistent itching, Chest pain, if fluid builds up around the lining of the heart, Shortness of breath, if fluid builds up in the lungs, High blood pressure (hypertension) that's difficult to control.
Signs and symptoms of kidney disease are often nonspecific, meaning they can also be caused by other illnesses. Because your kidneys are highly adaptable and able to compensate for lost function, signs and symptoms may not appear until irreversible damage has occurred.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms of kidney disease.
If you have a medical condition that increases your risk of kidney disease, your doctor is likely to monitor your blood pressure and kidney function with urine and blood tests during regular office visits. Ask your doctor whether these tests are necessary for you.
Chronic kidney disease occurs when a disease or condition impairs kidney function, causing kidney damage to worsen over several months or years.
Diseases and conditions that cause chronic kidney disease include: Type 1 or type 2 diabetes, High blood pressure, Glomerulonephritis (gloe-mer-u-low-nuh-FRY-tis), an inflammation of the kidney's filtering units (glomeruli), Interstitial nephritis (in-tur-STISH-ul nuh-FRY-tis), an inflammation of the kidney's tubules and surrounding structures, Polycystic kidney disease, Prolonged obstruction of the urinary tract, from conditions such as enlarged prostate, kidney stones and some cancers, Vesicoureteral (ves-ih-koe-yoo-REE-tur-ul) reflux, a condition that causes urine to back up into your kidneys, Recurrent kidney infection, also called pyelonephritis (pie-uh-low-nuh-FRY-tis).
Factors that may increase your risk of chronic kidney disease include: Diabetes, High blood pressure, Heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease, Smoking, Obesity, Being African-American, Native American or Asian-American, Family history of kidney disease, Abnormal kidney structure, Older age.
Chronic kidney disease can affect almost every part of your body. Potential complications may include: Fluid retention, which could lead to swelling in your arms and legs, high blood pressure, or fluid in your lungs (pulmonary edema), A sudden rise in potassium levels in your blood (hyperkalemia), which could impair your heart's ability to function and may be life-threatening, Heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease, Weak bones and an increased risk of bone fractures, Anemia, Decreased sex drive, erectile dysfunction or reduced fertility, Damage to your central nervous system, which can cause difficulty concentrating, personality changes or seizures, Decreased immune response, which makes you more vulnerable to infection, Pericarditis, an inflammation of the saclike membrane that envelops your heart (pericardium), Pregnancy complications that carry risks for the mother and the developing fetus, Irreversible damage to your kidneys (end-stage kidney disease), eventually requiring either dialysis or a kidney transplant for survival.
Many people with chronic lymphocytic leukemia have no early symptoms. Those who do develop signs and symptoms may experience: Enlarged, but painless, lymph nodes, Fatigue, Fever, Pain in the upper left portion of the abdomen, which may be caused by an enlarged spleen, Night sweats, Weight loss, Frequent infections.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
Doctors aren't certain what starts the process that causes chronic lymphocytic leukemia. What's known is that something happens to cause a genetic mutation in the DNA of blood-producing cells. This mutation causes the blood cells to produce abnormal, ineffective lymphocytes.
Beyond being ineffective, these abnormal lymphocytes continue to live and multiply, when normal lymphocytes would die. The abnormal lymphocytes accumulate in the blood and certain organs, where they cause complications. They may crowd healthy cells out of the bone marrow and interfere with normal blood cell production.
Doctors and researchers are working to understand the exact mechanism that causes chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Factors that may increase the risk of chronic lymphocytic leukemia include:
Your age. This disease occurs most often in older adults. On average, people diagnosed with chronic lymphocytic leukemia are in their 70s.
Your race. Whites are more likely to develop chronic lymphocytic leukemia than are people of other races.
Family history of blood and bone marrow cancers. A family history of chronic lymphocytic leukemia or other blood and bone marrow cancers may increase your risk.
Exposure to chemicals. Certain herbicides and insecticides, including Agent Orange used during the Vietnam War, have been linked to an increased risk of chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia may cause complications such as:
Frequent infections. People with chronic lymphocytic leukemia may experience frequent infections. In most cases, these infections are common infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract. But sometimes more-serious infections can develop.
A switch to a more aggressive form of cancer. A small number of people with chronic lymphocytic leukemia may develop a more aggressive form of cancer called diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Doctors sometimes refer to this as Richter's syndrome.
Increased risk of other cancers. People with chronic lymphocytic leukemia have an increased risk of other types of cancer, including skin cancer, such as melanoma, and cancers of the lung and the digestive tract.
Immune system problems. A small number of people with chronic lymphocytic leukemia may develop an immune system problem that causes the disease-fighting cells of the immune system to mistakenly attack the red blood cells or the platelets.
Chronic myelogenous leukemia often doesn't cause signs and symptoms. It might be detected during a blood test.
When they occur, signs and symptoms may include: Bone pain, Easy bleeding, Feeling full after eating a small amount of food, Feeling run-down or tired, Fever, Weight loss without trying, Loss of appetite, Pain or fullness below the ribs on the left side, Excessive sweating during sleep (night sweats).
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
Chronic myelogenous leukemia occurs when something goes awry in the genes of your bone marrow cells. It's not clear what initially sets off this process, but doctors have discovered how it progresses into chronic myelogenous leukemia.
Human cells normally contain 23 pairs of chromosomes. These chromosomes hold the DNA that contains the instructions (genes) that control the cells in your body. In people with chronic myelogenous leukemia, the chromosomes in the blood cells swap sections with each other. A section of chromosome 9 switches places with a section of chromosome 22, creating an extra-short chromosome 22 and an extra-long chromosome 9.
The extra-short chromosome 22 is called the Philadelphia chromosome, named for the city where it was discovered. The Philadelphia chromosome is present in the blood cells of 90 percent of people with chronic myelogenous leukemia.
The Philadelphia chromosome creates a new gene. Genes from chromosome 9 combine with genes from chromosome 22 to create a new gene called BCR-ABL. The BCR-ABL gene contains instructions that tell the abnormal blood cell to produce too much of a protein called tyrosine kinase. Tyrosine kinase promotes cancer by allowing certain blood cells to grow out of control.
Your blood cells originate in the bone marrow, a spongy material inside your bones. When your bone marrow functions normally, it produces immature cells (blood stem cells) in a controlled way. These cells then mature and specialize into the various types of blood cells that circulate in your body — red cells, white cells and platelets.
In chronic myelogenous leukemia, this process doesn't work properly. The tyrosine kinase caused by the BCR-ABL gene allows too many white blood cells to grow. Most or all of these cells contain the abnormal Philadelphia chromosome. The diseased white blood cells don't grow and die like normal cells. The diseased white blood cells build up in huge numbers, crowding out healthy blood cells and damaging the bone marrow.
When asked to locate your pain, you might sweep your hand over your entire pelvic area rather than point to a single spot. You might describe your chronic pelvic pain in one or more of the following ways: Severe and steady pain, Pain that comes and goes (intermittent), Dull aching, Sharp pains or cramping, Pressure or heaviness deep within your pelvis.
In addition, you may experience: Pain during intercourse, Pain while having a bowel movement or urinating, Pain when you sit for long periods of time.
Your discomfort may intensify after standing for long periods and may be relieved when you lie down. The pain may be mild and annoying, or it may be so severe that you miss work, can't sleep and can't exercise.
With any chronic pain problem, it can be difficult to know when you should go to the doctor. In general, make an appointment with your doctor if your pelvic pain disrupts your daily life or if your symptoms seem to be getting worse.
Chronic pelvic pain is a complex condition that can have multiple causes. Sometimes, a single disorder may be identified as the cause.
In other cases, however, pain may be the result of several medical conditions. For example, a woman might have endometriosis and interstitial cystitis, both of which contribute to chronic pelvic pain.
Some causes of chronic pelvic pain include:
Endometriosis. This is a condition in which tissue from the lining of your womb (uterus) grows outside your uterus. These deposits of tissue respond to your menstrual cycle, just as your uterine lining does — thickening, breaking down and bleeding each month as your hormone levels rise and fall. Because it's happening outside your uterus, the blood and tissue can't exit your body through your vagina. Instead, they remain in your abdomen, where they may lead to painful cysts and fibrous bands of scar tissue (adhesions).
Musculoskeletal problems. Conditions affecting your bones, joints and connective tissues (musculoskeletal system) — such as fibromyalgia, pelvic floor muscle tension, inflammation of the pubic joint (pubic symphysis) or hernia — can lead to recurring pelvic pain.
Chronic pelvic inflammatory disease. This can occur if a long-term infection, often sexually transmitted, causes scarring that involves your pelvic organs.
Ovarian remnant. After surgical removal of the uterus, ovaries and fallopian tubes, a small piece of ovary may accidentally be left inside and later develop painful cysts.
Fibroids. These noncancerous uterine growths may cause pressure or a feeling of heaviness in your lower abdomen. They rarely cause sharp pain unless they become deprived of a blood supply and begin to die (degenerate).
Irritable bowel syndrome. Symptoms associated with irritable bowel syndrome — bloating, constipation or diarrhea — can be a source of pelvic pain and pressure.
Painful bladder syndrome (interstitial cystitis). This condition is associated with recurring pain in your bladder and a frequent need to urinate. You may experience pelvic pain as your bladder fills, which may improve temporarily after you empty your bladder.
Pelvic congestion syndrome. Some doctors believe enlarged, varicose-type veins around your uterus and ovaries may result in pelvic pain. However, other doctors are much less certain that pelvic congestion syndrome is a cause of pelvic pain because most women with enlarged veins in the pelvis have no associated pain.
Psychological factors. Depression, chronic stress or a history of sexual or physical abuse may increase your risk of chronic pelvic pain. Emotional distress makes pain worse, and living with chronic pain contributes to emotional distress. These two factors often become a vicious cycle.
Common signs and symptoms of chronic sinusitis include: Nasal inflammation, Thick, discolored discharge from the nose, Drainage down the back of the throat (postnasal drainage), Nasal obstruction or congestion, causing difficulty breathing through your nose, Pain, tenderness and swelling around your eyes, cheeks, nose or forehead, Reduced sense of smell and taste.
Other signs and symptoms can include: Ear pain, Aching in your upper jaw and teeth, Cough or throat clearing, Sore throat, Bad breath, Fatigue.
Chronic sinusitis and acute sinusitis have similar signs and symptoms, but acute sinusitis is a temporary infection of the sinuses often associated with a cold. The signs and symptoms of chronic sinusitis last at least 12 weeks, but you may have several episodes of acute sinusitis before developing chronic sinusitis. Fever isn't a common sign of chronic sinusitis, but you might have one with acute sinusitis. You've had sinusitis a number of times, and the condition doesn't respond to treatment, You have sinusitis symptoms that last more than 10 days, Your symptoms don't improve after you see your doctor.
See a doctor immediately if you have the following signs or symptoms, which could indicate a serious infection: Fever, Swelling or redness around your eyes, Severe headache, Forehead swelling, Confusion, Double vision or other vision changes, Stiff neck.
Common causes of chronic sinusitis include:
Nasal polyps. These tissue growths can block the nasal passages or sinuses.
Deviated nasal septum. A crooked septum — the wall between the nostrils — may restrict or block sinus passages, making the symptoms of sinusitis worse.
Other medical conditions. The complications of conditions such as cystic fibrosis, HIV and other immune system-related diseases can lead to nasal blockage.
Respiratory tract infections. Infections in your respiratory tract — most commonly colds — can inflame and thicken your sinus membranes and block mucus drainage. These infections can be viral, bacterial or fungal.
Allergies such as hay fever. Inflammation that occurs with allergies can block your sinuses.
You're at increased risk of getting chronic sinusitis if you have: A deviated septum, Nasal polyps, Asthma, Aspirin sensitivity, A dental infection, An immune system disorder such as HIV/AIDS or cystic fibrosis, Hay fever or another allergic condition, Regular exposure to pollutants such as cigarette smoke.
Serious complications of chronic sinusitis complications are rare, but may include:
Vision problems. If your sinus infection spreads to your eye socket, it can cause reduced vision or possibly blindness that can be permanent.
Infections. Uncommonly, people with chronic sinusitis may develop inflammation of the membranes and fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis), an infection in the bones, or a serious skin infection.
There are no specific symptoms that have been clearly linked to CTE. Some of the possible signs and symptoms of CTE can occur in many other conditions, but in the few people with proven CTE, symptoms have included: Difficulty thinking (cognitive impairment), Impulsive behavior, Depression or apathy, Short-term memory loss, Difficulty planning and carrying out tasks (executive function), Emotional instability, Substance misuse, Suicidal thoughts or behavior.
CTE symptoms don't develop right after a head injury, but experts believe that they might develop over years or decades after repeated head trauma.
The full list of signs and symptoms to look for in people with CTE at autopsy is still unknown. It is unclear what kind of symptoms, if any, CTE may cause. Little is known right now about how CTE progresses.
CTE is thought to develop over many years after repeated brain injuries that may be mild or severe. However, see your doctor in case of the following:
Suicidal thoughts. Research shows that people with CTE may be at increased risk of suicide. If you have thoughts of hurting yourself, call 911, your local emergency number or the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-TALK (800-273-8255).
Head injury. See your doctor if you've had a head injury, even if you didn't need emergency care. If your child has received a head injury that concerns you, call your child's doctor immediately. Depending on the signs and symptoms, your doctor may recommend seeking immediate medical care.
Memory problems. See your doctor if you have concerns about your memory or other thinking (cognitive) or behavior problems.
Personality or mood changes. See your doctor if depression, anxiety, aggression or impulsivity occur.
Repetitive head trauma is likely the cause of CTE. Football and ice hockey players, as well as military personnel serving war zones, have been the focus of most CTE studies, though other sports and factors such as physical abuse also can lead to repetitive head injuries.
However, not all athletes and not everyone who experiences repeated concussions, including military personnel, go on to develop CTE. Some studies have shown no increased incidence of CTE in people exposed to repeated head injuries.
CTE is thought to cause areas of the brain to waste away (atrophy). Injuries to the section of nerve cells that conduct electrical impulses affect communication between cells.
It's possible that people with CTE may show signs of another neurodegenerative disease, including Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) — also known as Lou Gehrig's disease — Parkinson's disease or frontotemporal lobar degeneration (frontotemporal dementia).
The main risk factor for chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or CTE, is thought to be repeated head injuries. But experts are still learning about the risk factors for CTE.
Churg-Strauss syndrome varies greatly from person to person. Some people have only mild symptoms. Others have severe or life-threatening complications.
Also known as EGPA, the syndrome tends to occur in three stages and gets progressively worse. Almost everyone with the condition has asthma, chronic sinusitis and elevated counts of white blood cells called eosinophils. Asthma usually begins five to nine years before the diagnosis of Churg-Strauss syndrome.
Other signs and symptoms might include: Hay fever, Fever, Loss of appetite and weight loss, Joint and muscle pain, Fatigue, Cough, Abdominal pain and gastrointestinal bleeding, Weakness, fatigue or a general feeling of being unwell, Rash or skin sores, Pain, numbness and tingling in your hands and feet, Severe abdominal pain, Shortness of breath, Blood in your urine or stools.
See your doctor if you develop signs and symptoms such as breathing difficulties or a runny nose that doesn't go away, especially if it's accompanied by persistent facial pain. Also see your doctor if you have asthma or hay fever that suddenly worsens.
Churg-Strauss syndrome is rare, and it's more likely that these symptoms have some other cause. But it's important that your doctor evaluate them. Early diagnosis and treatment improve the chances of a good outcome.
The cause of Churg-Strauss syndrome is largely unknown. It's likely that a combination of genes and environmental factors, such as allergens or certain medications, triggers an overactive immune system response. Instead of protecting against invading bacteria and viruses, the immune system targets healthy tissue, causing widespread inflammation.
Possible risk factors for Churg-Strauss syndrome include:
Age. On average, people with Churg-Strauss syndrome are diagnosed between 30 and 50 years of age.
History of asthma or nasal problems. Most people diagnosed with Churg-Strauss syndrome have a history of severe nasal allergies, chronic sinusitis or asthma.
Churg-Strauss syndrome can affect many organs, including your lungs, skin, gastrointestinal system, kidneys, muscles, joints and heart. Without treatment, the disease can be fatal.
Complications, which depend on the organs involved, can include:
Peripheral nerve damage. Churg-Strauss syndrome can damage the nerves in your hands and feet, leading to numbness, burning and loss of function.
Skin scarring. The inflammation can cause sores that can leave scars.
Heart disease. Heart-related complications of Churg-Strauss syndrome include inflammation of the membrane surrounding your heart, inflammation of the muscular layer of your heart wall, heart attack and heart failure.
Kidney damage. If Churg-Strauss syndrome affects your kidneys, you can develop glomerulonephritis. This disease hampers your kidneys' filtering ability, leading to a buildup of waste products in your bloodstream.
Cirrhosis often has no signs or symptoms until liver damage is extensive. When signs and symptoms do occur, they may include: Fatigue, Easily bleeding or bruising, Loss of appetite, Nausea, Swelling in your legs, feet or ankles (edema), Weight loss, Itchy skin, Yellow discoloration in the skin and eyes (jaundice), Fluid accumulation in your abdomen (ascites), Spiderlike blood vessels on your skin, Redness in the palms of the hands, For women, absent or loss of periods not related to menopause, For men, loss of sex drive, breast enlargement (gynecomastia) or testicular atrophy, Confusion, drowsiness and slurred speech (hepatic encephalopathy).
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any of the signs or symptoms listed above.
A wide range of diseases and conditions can damage the liver and lead to cirrhosis.
Some of the causes include: Chronic alcohol abuse, Chronic viral hepatitis (hepatitis B, C and D), Fat accumulating in the liver (nonalcoholic fatty liver disease), Iron buildup in the body (hemochromatosis), Cystic fibrosis, Copper accumulated in the liver (Wilson's disease), Poorly formed bile ducts (biliary atresia), Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, Inherited disorders of sugar metabolism (galactosemia or glycogen storage disease), Genetic digestive disorder (Alagille syndrome), Liver disease caused by your body's immune system (autoimmune hepatitis), Destruction of the bile ducts (primary biliary cirrhosis), Hardening and scarring of the bile ducts (primary sclerosing cholangitis, Infection, such as syphilis or brucellosis, Medications, including methotrexate or isoniazid.
Drinking too much alcohol. Excessive alcohol consumption is a risk factor for cirrhosis.
Being overweight. Being obese increases your risk of conditions that may lead to cirrhosis, such as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.
Having viral hepatitis. Not everyone with chronic hepatitis will develop cirrhosis, but it's one of the world's leading causes of liver disease.
Complications of cirrhosis can include:
High blood pressure in the veins that supply the liver (portal hypertension). Cirrhosis slows the normal flow of blood through the liver, thus increasing pressure in the vein that brings blood to the liver from the intestines and spleen.
Swelling in the legs and abdomen. The increased pressure in the portal vein can cause fluid to accumulate in the legs (edema) and in the abdomen (ascites). Edema and ascites also may result from the inability of the liver to make enough of certain blood proteins, such as albumin.
Enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly). Portal hypertension can also cause changes to and swelling of the spleen, and trapping of white blood cells and platelets. Decreased white blood cells and platelets in your blood can be the first sign of cirrhosis.
Bleeding. Portal hypertension can cause blood to be redirected to smaller veins. Strained by the extra pressure, these smaller veins can burst, causing serious bleeding. Portal hypertension may cause enlarged veins (varices) in the esophagus (esophageal varices) or the stomach (gastric varices) and lead to life-threatening bleeding. If the liver can't make enough clotting factors, this also can contribute to continued bleeding.
Infections. If you have cirrhosis, your body may have difficulty fighting infections. Ascites can lead to bacterial peritonitis, a serious infection.
Malnutrition. Cirrhosis may make it more difficult for your body to process nutrients, leading to weakness and weight loss.
Buildup of toxins in the brain (hepatic encephalopathy). A liver damaged by cirrhosis isn't able to clear toxins from the blood as well as a healthy liver can. These toxins can then build up in the brain and cause mental confusion and difficulty concentrating. With time, hepatic encephalopathy can progress to unresponsiveness or coma.
Jaundice. Jaundice occurs when the diseased liver doesn't remove enough bilirubin, a blood waste product, from your blood. Jaundice causes yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes and darkening of urine.
Bone disease. Some people with cirrhosis lose bone strength and are at greater risk of fractures.
Increased risk of liver cancer. A large proportion of people who develop liver cancer have pre-existing cirrhosis.
Acute-on-chronic cirrhosis. Some people end up experiencing multiorgan failure. Researchers now believe this is a distinct complication in some people who have cirrhosis, but they don't fully understand its causes.
Claudication refers to muscle pain due to lack of oxygen that's triggered by activity and relieved by rest. Symptoms include the following: Pain, ache, discomfort or fatigue in muscles every time you use those muscles, Pain in the calves, thighs, buttocks, hips or feet, Less often, pain in shoulders, biceps and forearms, Pain that gets better soon after resting.
The pain may become more severe over time. You may even start to have pain at rest.
Signs or symptoms of peripheral artery disease, usually in more-advanced stages, include: Cool skin, Severe, constant pain that progresses to numbness, Skin discoloration, Wounds that don't heal.
Talk to your doctor if you have pain in your legs or arms when you exercise. Claudication can lead to a cycle that results in worsening cardiovascular health. Pain may make exercise intolerable, and a lack of exercise results in poorer health.
Peripheral artery disease is a sign of poor cardiovascular health and an increased risk of heart attack and stroke.
Other conditions involving the blood, nerves, and bones can contribute to leg and arm pain during exercise. It's important to have a complete exam and appropriate tests to diagnose potential causes of pain.
Claudication is most often a symptom of peripheral artery disease. The peripheral arteries are the large vessels that deliver blood to the network of vessels in your legs and arms.
Peripheral artery disease is damage to an artery that restricts the flow of blood in an arm or leg (a limb). When you're at rest, the limited blood flow is generally still enough. When you're active, however, the muscles aren't getting enough oxygen and nutrients to work well and remain healthy.
Damage to peripheral arteries is usually caused by atherosclerosis. This is the buildup of cholesterol and other fats, blood cells, and other cellular debris into abnormal structures (plaques) on the lining of an artery.
Plaques cause a narrowing and stiffening of the artery, limiting the flow of blood. If the plaques rupture, a blood clot can form, further reducing blood flow.
The risk factors for peripheral artery disease and claudication include the following: Smoking, High cholesterol, High blood pressure, Obesity (a body mass index, or BMI, over 30), Diabetes, Chronic kidney disease, Age older than 70 years, Age older than 50 years if you also smoke or have diabetes, A family history of atherosclerosis, peripheral artery disease or claudication.
Claudication is generally considered a warning of significant atherosclerosis in the circulatory system, indicating an increased risk of heart attack or stroke. Additional complications of peripheral artery disease due to atherosclerosis include: Skin lesions that don't heal, Death of muscle and skin tissues (gangrene), Amputation of a limb.
Usually, a split (cleft) in the lip or palate is immediately identifiable at birth. Cleft lip and cleft palate may appear as: A split in the lip and roof of the mouth (palate) that affects one or both sides of the face, A split in the lip that appears as only a small notch in the lip or extends from the lip through the upper gum and palate into the bottom of the nose, A split in the roof of the mouth that doesn't affect the appearance of the face.
Less commonly, a cleft occurs only in the muscles of the soft palate (submucous cleft palate), which are at the back of the mouth and covered by the mouth's lining. This type of cleft often goes unnoticed at birth and may not be diagnosed until later when signs develop. Signs and symptoms of submucous cleft palate may include: Difficulty with feedings, Difficulty swallowing, with potential for liquids or foods to come out the nose, Nasal speaking voice, Chronic ear infections.
A cleft lip and cleft palate are usually noticed at birth, and your doctor may start coordinating care at that time. If your baby has signs and symptoms of a submucous cleft palate, make an appointment with your child's doctor.
Cleft lip and cleft palate occur when tissues in the baby's face and mouth don't fuse properly. Normally, the tissues that make up the lip and palate fuse together in the second and third months of pregnancy. But in babies with cleft lip and cleft palate, the fusion never takes place or occurs only part way, leaving an opening (cleft).
Researchers believe that most cases of cleft lip and cleft palate are caused by an interaction of genetic and environmental factors. In many babies, a definite cause isn't discovered.
The mother or the father can pass on genes that cause clefting, either alone or as part of a genetic syndrome that includes a cleft lip or cleft palate as one of its signs. In some cases, babies inherit a gene that makes them more likely to develop a cleft, and then an environmental trigger actually causes the cleft to occur.
Several factors may increase the likelihood of a baby developing a cleft lip and cleft palate, including:
Family history. Parents with a family history of cleft lip or cleft palate face a higher risk of having a baby with a cleft.
Exposure to certain substances during pregnancy. Cleft lip and cleft palate may be more likely to occur in pregnant women who smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol or take certain medications.
Having diabetes. There is some evidence that women diagnosed with diabetes before pregnancy may have an increased risk of having a baby with a cleft lip with or without a cleft palate.
Being obese during pregnancy. There is some evidence that babies born to obese women may have increased risk of cleft lip and palate.
Males are more likely to have a cleft lip with or without cleft palate. Cleft palate without cleft lip is more common in females. In the United States, cleft lip and palate are reportedly most common in Native Americans and least common in African-Americans.
Children with cleft lip with or without cleft palate face a variety of challenges, depending on the type and severity of the cleft.
Difficulty feeding. One of the most immediate concerns after birth is feeding. While most babies with cleft lip can breast-feed, a cleft palate may make sucking difficult.
Ear infections and hearing loss. Babies with cleft palate are especially at risk of developing middle ear fluid and hearing loss.
Dental problems. If the cleft extends through the upper gum, tooth development may be affected.
Speech difficulties. Because the palate is used in forming sounds, the development of normal speech can be affected by a cleft palate. Speech may sound too nasal.
Challenges of coping with a medical condition. Children with clefts may face social, emotional and behavioral problems due to differences in appearance and the stress of intensive medical care.
If your child has clubfoot, here's what it might look like:
The top of the foot is usually twisted downward and inward, increasing the arch and turning the heel inward.
The foot may be turned so severely that it actually looks as if it's upside down.
The affected leg or foot may be slightly shorter.
The calf muscles in the affected leg are usually underdeveloped.
Despite its look, clubfoot itself doesn't cause any discomfort or pain.
More than likely your doctor will notice clubfoot soon after your child is born, based on appearance. Your doctor can advise you on the most appropriate treatment or refer you to a doctor who specializes in bone and muscle problems (pediatric orthopedist).
The cause of clubfoot is unknown (idiopathic), but it may be a combination of genetics and environment.
Boys are about twice as likely to develop clubfoot than girls are.
Risk factors include:
Family history. If either of the parents or their other children have had clubfoot, the baby is more likely to have it as well.
Congenital conditions. In some cases, clubfoot can be associated with other abnormalities of the skeleton that are present at birth (congenital), such as spina bifida, a birth defect that occurs when the spine and spinal cord don't develop or close properly.
Environment. Smoking during pregnancy can significantly increase the baby's risk of clubfoot.
Not enough amniotic fluid during pregnancy. Too little of the fluid that surrounds the baby in the womb may increase the risk of clubfoot.
Clubfoot typically doesn't cause any problems until your child starts to stand and walk. If the clubfoot is treated, your child will most likely walk fairly normally. He or she may have some difficulty with:
Movement. The affected foot may be slightly less flexible.
Leg length. The affected leg may be slightly shorter, but generally does not cause significant problems with mobility.
Shoe size. The affected foot may be up to 1 1/2 shoe sizes smaller than the unaffected foot.
Calf size. The muscles of the calf on the affected side may always be smaller than those on the other side.
However, if not treated, clubfoot causes more-serious problems. These can include:
Arthritis. Your child is likely to develop arthritis.
Poor self-image. The unusual appearance of the foot may make your child's body image a concern during the teen years.
Inability to walk normally. The twist of the ankle may not allow your child to walk on the sole of the foot. To compensate, he or she may walk on the ball of the foot, the outside of the foot or even the top of the foot in severe cases.
Problems stemming from walking adjustments. Walking adjustments may prevent natural growth of the calf muscles, cause large sores or calluses on the foot, and result in an awkward gait.
A cluster headache strikes quickly, usually without warning, although you might first have migraine-like nausea and aura. Common signs and symptoms during a headache include: Excruciating pain that is generally situated in, behind or around one eye, but may radiate to other areas of your face, head and neck, One-sided pain, Restlessness, Excessive tearing, Redness of your eye on the affected side, Stuffy or runny nose on the affected side, Forehead or facial sweating on the affected side, Pale skin (pallor) or flushing on your face, Swelling around your eye on the affected side, Drooping eyelid on the affected side.
People with cluster headache, unlike those with migraine, are likely to pace or sit and rock back and forth. Some migraine-like symptoms — including sensitivity to light and sound — can occur with a cluster headache, though usually on one side.
A cluster period generally lasts for several weeks to months. The starting date and the duration of each cluster period might be consistent from period to period. For example, cluster periods can occur seasonally, such as every spring or every fall.
Most people have episodic cluster headaches. In episodic cluster headaches, the headaches occur for one week to a year, followed by a pain-free remission period that can last as long as 12 months before another cluster headache develops.
Chronic cluster periods might continue for more than a year, or pain-free periods might last less than one month.
During a cluster period: Headaches usually occur every day, sometimes several times a day, A single attack can last from 15 minutes to three hours, The attacks often occur at the same time each day, Most attacks occur at night, usually one to two hours after you go to bed.
The pain usually ends as suddenly as it began, with rapidly decreasing intensity. After attacks, most people are pain-free but exhausted.
See your doctor if you've just started to have cluster headaches to rule out other disorders and to find the most effective treatment.
Headache pain, even when severe, usually isn't the result of an underlying disease. But headaches can occasionally indicate a serious underlying medical condition, such as a brain tumor or rupture of a weakened blood vessel (aneurysm).
Additionally, if you have a history of headaches, see your doctor if the pattern changes or your headaches suddenly feel different.
Seek emergency care if you have any of these signs and symptoms: An abrupt, severe headache, often like a thunderclap, A headache with a fever, nausea or vomiting, a stiff neck, mental confusion, seizures, numbness, or speaking difficulties, which can indicate a number of problems, including a stroke, meningitis, encephalitis or a brain tumor, A headache after a head injury, even if it's a minor fall or bump, especially if it worsens, A sudden, severe headache unlike any you've had, A headache that worsens over days and changes in pattern.
The exact cause of cluster headaches is unknown, but cluster headache patterns suggest that abnormalities in the body's biological clock (hypothalamus) play a role.
Unlike migraine and tension headache, cluster headache generally isn't associated with triggers, such as foods, hormonal changes or stress.
Once a cluster period begins, however, drinking alcohol may quickly trigger a splitting headache. For this reason, many people with cluster headache avoid alcohol during a cluster period.
Other possible triggers include the use of medications such as nitroglycerin, a drug used to treat heart disease.
Risk factors for cluster headaches include:
Sex. Men are more likely to have cluster headaches.
Age. Most people who develop cluster headaches are between ages 20 and 50, although the condition can develop at any age.
Smoking. Many people who get cluster headache attacks are smokers. However, quitting smoking usually has no effect on the headaches.
Alcohol use. If you have cluster headaches, drinking alcohol during a cluster period may increase your risk of an attack.
A family history. Having a parent or sibling who has had cluster headache might increase your risk.
Coarctation of the aorta symptoms depend on the severity of the condition. Most people don't have symptoms. Mild coarctation may not be diagnosed until adulthood.
Babies with severe coarctation of the aorta may begin having symptoms shortly after birth. These include: Pale skin, Irritability, Heavy sweating, Difficulty breathing, Difficulty feeding.
People with coarctation of the aorta may also have signs or symptoms of other heart defects, which often occur with the condition.
Signs or symptoms of coarctation of the aorta after infancy commonly include: High blood pressure, Headaches, Muscle weakness, Leg cramps or cold feet, Nosebleeds, Chest pain.
Seek medical help if you or your child has the following signs or symptoms: Severe chest pain, Fainting, Sudden shortness of breath, Unexplained high blood pressure.
While having these signs or symptoms doesn't always mean that you have a serious health condition, it's best to get checked out quickly. Early detection and treatment might help save your life.
Doctors aren't certain what causes coarctation of the aorta. The condition is generally present at birth (congenital). Congenital heart defects are the most common of all birth defects.
Rarely, coarctation of the aorta develops later in life. Conditions or events that can narrow the aorta and cause this condition include: Traumatic injury, Severe hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis), Inflamed arteries (Takayasu's arteritis).
Coarctation of the aorta usually occurs beyond the blood vessels that branch off to your upper body and before the blood vessels that lead to your lower body. This can often lead to high blood pressure in your arms but low blood pressure in your legs and ankles.
With coarctation of the aorta, the lower left heart chamber (left ventricle) of your heart works harder to pump blood through the narrowed aorta, and blood pressure increases in the left ventricle. This may cause the wall of the left ventricle to thicken (hypertrophy).
Coarctation of the aorta often occurs along with other congenital heart defects. Certain heart conditions are often associated with coarctation, including:
Bicuspid aortic valve. The aortic valve separates the lower left chamber (left ventricle) of the heart from the aorta. A bicuspid aortic valve has two flaps (cusps) instead of the usual three. Many people with coarctation of the aorta have a bicuspid aortic valve.
Sub-aortic stenosis. Sub-aortic stenosis occurs when there is a narrowing of the area below the aortic valve that obstructs blood flow from the left ventricle to the aorta. This narrowing may be in the form of a fibrous membrane.
Patent ductus arteriosus. The ductus arteriosus is a blood vessel that connects a baby's left pulmonary artery to the aorta. It allows blood to bypass the lungs while the baby is growing in the womb. Shortly after birth, the ductus arteriosus usually closes. If it remains open, it's called a patent ductus arteriosus.
Holes in the wall between the left and right sides of the heart. Some people are born with a hole in the wall (septum) between the upper heart chambers (atrial septal defect) or the lower heart chambers (ventricular septal defect).This causes oxygen-rich blood from the left side of the heart to mix with oxygen-poor blood in the right side of the heart.
Congenital mitral valve stenosis. The mitral valve is between the upper and lower left heart chambers. It lets blood flow through the left side of your heart. In mitral valve stenosis, the valve is narrowed. As a result, the movement of blood between the upper and lower left heart chambers is reduced, increasing the pressure in the upper left chamber (atrium). The oxygen-rich blood from the lungs returns to the heart through veins that attach to the upper left chamber. Increased pressure in the left atrium may result in symptoms of lung congestion. These symptoms include shortness of breath, difficulty breathing during exercise and shortness of breath when lying flat.
Coarctation of the aorta is more common in males than in females, as well as in those who have certain genetic conditions, such as Turner syndrome.
Without treatment, coarctation of the aorta frequently leads to complications. In babies, it may lead to heart failure or death.
High blood pressure is the most common long-term complication of coarctation of the aorta. Blood pressure usually drops after the aortic coarctation has been repaired, but may still be higher than normal.
Other complications of coarctation of the aorta may include: A weakened or bulging artery in the brain (brain aneurysm) or bleeding in the brain (hemorrhage), Aortic rupture or tear (dissection), Enlargement in a section of the wall of the aorta (aneurysm), Heart failure, Premature coronary artery disease — narrowing of the blood vessels that supply the heart, Stroke.
If the coarctation of the aorta is severe, your heart might not be able to pump enough blood to your other organs. This can cause heart damage and may lead to kidney failure or other organ failure.
Complications are also possible after treatment for coarctation of the aorta. They include: Aorta re-narrowing (re-coarctation, possibly years after treatment), High blood pressure, Aortic aneurysm or rupture.
You will need lifelong follow-up for coarctation of the aorta, and you may require additional treatments.
A cold sore usually passes through several stages:
Tingling and itching. Many people feel itching, burning or tingling around the lips for a day or so before a small, hard, painful spot appears and blisters erupt.
Blisters. Small fluid-filled blisters typically erupt along the border of your lips. Sometimes they appear around the nose or cheeks or inside the mouth.
Oozing and crusting. The small blisters may merge and then burst, leaving shallow open sores that ooze and crust over.
Signs and symptoms vary, depending on whether this is your first outbreak or a recurrence. The first time you have a cold sore, symptoms may not start for up to 20 days after you were first exposed to the virus. The sores can last several days, and the blisters can take two to three weeks to heal completely. Recurrences typically appear at the same spot each time and tend to be less severe than the first outbreak.
In a first-time outbreak, you also might experience: Fever, Painful gums, Sore throat, Headache, Muscle aches, Swollen lymph nodes.
Children under 5 years old may have cold sores inside their mouths and the lesions are commonly mistaken for canker sores. Canker sores involve only the mucous membrane and aren't caused by the herpes simplex virus.
Cold sores generally clear up without treatment. See your doctor if: You have a weakened immune system, The cold sores don't heal within two weeks, Symptoms are severe, You have frequent recurrences of cold sores, You experience irritation in your eyes.
Cold sores are caused by certain strains of the herpes simplex virus (HSV). HSV-1 usually causes cold sores. HSV-2 is usually responsible for genital herpes. But either type can spread to the face or genitals through close contact, such as kissing or oral sex. Shared eating utensils, razors and towels might also spread HSV-1.
Cold sores are most contagious when you have oozing blisters because the virus easily spreads through contact with infected body fluids. But you can spread the virus even if you don't have blisters. Many people who are infected with the virus that causes cold sores never develop signs and symptoms.
Once you've had an episode of herpes infection, the virus lies dormant in nerve cells in your skin and may emerge as another cold sore at the same place as before. Recurrence may be triggered by: Viral infection or fever, Hormonal changes, such as those related to menstruation, Stress, Fatigue, Exposure to sunlight and wind, Changes in the immune system, Injury to the skin.
Almost everyone is at risk of cold sores. Most adults carry the virus that causes cold sores, even if they've never had symptoms.
You're most at risk of complications from the virus if you have a weakened immune system from conditions and treatments such as: HIV/AIDS, Atopic dermatitis (eczema), Cancer chemotherapy, Anti-rejection drugs for organ transplants.
In some people, the virus that causes cold sores can cause problems in other areas of the body, including:
Fingertips. Both HSV-1 and HSV-2 can be spread to the fingers. This type of infection is often referred to as herpes whitlow. Children who suck their thumbs may transfer the infection from their mouths to their thumbs.
Eyes. The virus can sometimes cause eye infection. Repeated infections can cause scarring and injury, which may lead to vision problems or loss of vision.
Widespread areas of skin. People who have a skin condition called atopic dermatitis (eczema) are at higher risk of cold sores spreading all across their bodies. This can become a medical emergency.
Cold urticaria signs and symptoms may include: Temporary reddish, itchy welts (hives) on the area of skin that was exposed to cold, A worsening of the reaction as the skin warms, Swelling of hands while holding cold objects, Swelling of lips from consuming cold food or drink.
Severe reactions may include: A whole-body response (anaphylaxis), which can cause fainting, a racing heart, swelling of limbs or torso, and shock, Swelling of the tongue and throat, which can make it difficult to breathe.
Cold urticaria symptoms begin soon after the skin is exposed to a sudden drop in air temperature or to cold water. Damp and windy conditions may make a flare of symptoms more likely. Each episode may persist for about two hours.
The worst reactions generally occur with full skin exposure, such as swimming in cold water. Such a reaction could lead to loss of consciousness and drowning.
If you have skin reactions after cold exposure, see your doctor. Even if the reactions are mild, your doctor will want to rule out underlying conditions that may be causing the problem.
Seek emergency care if after sudden exposure to cold you experience a whole-body response (anaphylaxis) or difficulty breathing.
No one knows exactly what causes cold urticaria. Certain people appear to have very sensitive skin cells, due to an inherited trait, a virus or an illness. In the most common forms of this condition, cold triggers the release of histamine and other chemicals into the bloodstream. These chemicals cause redness, itching and sometimes a whole-body (systemic) reaction.
You're more likely to have this condition if:
You're a young adult. The most common type — primary acquired cold urticaria — occurs most frequently in young adults.
You have an underlying health condition. A less common type — secondary acquired cold urticaria — can be caused by an underlying health problem, such as hepatitis or cancer.
You have certain inherited traits. Rarely, cold urticaria is inherited. This familial type causes painful welts and flu-like symptoms after exposure to cold.
The main possible complication of cold urticaria is a severe reaction that occurs after exposing large areas of skin to cold, for example, by swimming in cold water.
Fussing and crying are normal for infants, especially during the first three months. And the range for what is normal crying is difficult to pin down. In general, colic is defined as crying for three or more hours a day, three or more days a week, for three or more weeks.
Features of colic may include the following: Intense crying that may seem more like screaming or an expression of pain, Crying for no apparent reason, unlike crying to express hunger or the need for a diaper change, Extreme fussiness even after crying has diminished, Predictable timing, with episodes often occurring in the evening, Facial discoloring, such as reddening of the face or paler skin around the mouth, Bodily tension, such as pulled up or stiffened legs, stiffened arms, clenched fists, arched back, or tense abdomen.
Sometimes there is relief in symptoms after the infant passes gas or has a bowel movement. Gas is likely the result of swallowed air during prolonged crying.
Excessive, inconsolable crying may be colic or an indication of an illness or condition that causes pain or discomfort. Schedule an appointment with your child's doctor for a thorough exam if your infant experiences excessive crying or other signs or symptoms of colic.
The cause of colic is unknown. It may result from numerous contributing factors. While a number of causes have been explored, it's difficult for researchers to account for all the important features, such as why it usually begins late in the first month of life, how it varies among infants, why it happens at certain times of day and why it resolves on its own in time.
Possible contributing factors that have been explored include: Digestive system that isn't fully developed, Imbalance of healthy bacteria in the digestive tract, Food allergies or intolerances, Overfeeding, underfeeding or infrequent burping, Early form of childhood migraine, Family stress or anxiety.
Risk factors for colic are not well-understood. Research has not shown differences in risk when the following factors were considered: Sex of the child, Preterm and full-term pregnancies, Formula-fed and breast-fed babies.
Infants born to mothers who smoked during pregnancy or after delivery have an increased risk of developing colic.
Colic does not cause short-term or long-term medical problems for a child.
Colic is stressful for parents. Research has shown an association between colic and the following problems with parent well-being: Increased risk of postpartum depression in mothers, Early cessation of breast-feeding, Feelings of guilt, exhaustion, helplessness or anger.
The stress of calming a crying baby has sometimes prompted parents to shake or otherwise harm their child. Shaking a baby can cause serious damage to the brain and death. The risk of these uncontrolled reactions is greater if parents don't have information about soothing a crying child, education about colic and the support needed for caring for an infant with colic.
Signs and symptoms of colon cancer include: A persistent change in your bowel habits, including diarrhea or constipation or a change in the consistency of your stool, Rectal bleeding or blood in your stool, Persistent abdominal discomfort, such as cramps, gas or pain, A feeling that your bowel doesn't empty completely, Weakness or fatigue, Unexplained weight loss.
Many people with colon cancer experience no symptoms in the early stages of the disease. When symptoms appear, they'll likely vary, depending on the cancer's size and location in your large intestine.
If you notice any persistent symptoms that worry you, make an appointment with your doctor.
Talk with your doctor about when to begin colon cancer screening. Guidelines generally recommend that colon cancer screenings begin around 50. Your doctor may recommend more frequent or earlier screening if you have other risk factors, such as a family history of the disease.
Doctors aren't certain what causes most colon cancers.
In general, colon cancer begins when healthy cells in the colon develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains a set of instructions that tell a cell what to do.
Healthy cells grow and divide in an orderly way to keep your body functioning normally. But when a cell's DNA is damaged and becomes cancerous, cells continue to divide — even when new cells aren't needed. As the cells accumulate, they form a tumor.
With time, the cancer cells can grow to invade and destroy normal tissue nearby. And cancerous cells can travel to other parts of the body to form deposits there (metastasis).
Factors that may increase your risk of colon cancer include:
Older age. Colon cancer can be diagnosed at any age, but a majority of people with colon cancer are older than 50. The rates of colon cancer in people younger than 50 have been increasing, but doctors aren't sure why.
African-American race. African-Americans have a greater risk of colon cancer than do people of other races.
A personal history of colorectal cancer or polyps. If you've already had colon cancer or noncancerous colon polyps, you have a greater risk of colon cancer in the future.
Inflammatory intestinal conditions. Chronic inflammatory diseases of the colon, such as ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, can increase your risk of colon cancer.
Inherited syndromes that increase colon cancer risk. Some gene mutations passed through generations of your family can increase your risk of colon cancer significantly. Only a small percentage of colon cancers are linked to inherited genes. The most common inherited syndromes that increase colon cancer risk are familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and Lynch syndrome, which is also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC).
Family history of colon cancer. You're more likely to develop colon cancer if you have a blood relative who has had the disease. If more than one family member has colon cancer or rectal cancer, your risk is even greater.
Low-fiber, high-fat diet. Colon cancer and rectal cancer may be associated with a typical Western diet, which is low in fiber and high in fat and calories. Research in this area has had mixed results. Some studies have found an increased risk of colon cancer in people who eat diets high in red meat and processed meat.
A sedentary lifestyle. People who are inactive are more likely to develop colon cancer. Getting regular physical activity may reduce your risk of colon cancer.
Diabetes. People with diabetes or insulin resistance have an increased risk of colon cancer.
Obesity. People who are obese have an increased risk of colon cancer and an increased risk of dying of colon cancer when compared with people considered normal weight.
Smoking. People who smoke may have an increased risk of colon cancer.
Alcohol. Heavy use of alcohol increases your risk of colon cancer.
Radiation therapy for cancer. Radiation therapy directed at the abdomen to treat previous cancers increases the risk of colon cancer.
Colon polyps often cause no symptoms. You might not know you have a polyp until your doctor finds it during an examination of your bowel.
But some people with colon polyps experience:
Rectal bleeding. This can be a sign of colon polyps or cancer or other conditions, such as hemorrhoids or minor tears in your anus.
Change in stool color. Blood can show up as red streaks in your stool or make stool appear black. A change in color may also be caused by foods, medications and supplements.
Change in bowel habits. Constipation or diarrhea that lasts longer than a week may indicate the presence of a large colon polyp. But a number of other conditions can also cause changes in bowel habits.
Pain. A large colon polyp can partially obstruct your bowel, leading to crampy abdominal pain.
Iron deficiency anemia. Bleeding from polyps can occur slowly over time, without visible blood in your stool. Chronic bleeding robs your body of the iron needed to produce the substance that allows red blood cells to carry oxygen to your body (hemoglobin). The result is iron deficiency anemia, which can make you feel tired and short of breath.
See your doctor if you experience: Abdominal pain, Blood in your stool, A change in your bowel habits that lasts longer than a week.
You should be screened regularly for polyps if:
You're age 50 or older.
You have risk factors, such as a family history of colon cancer. Some high-risk individuals should begin regular screening much earlier than age 50.
Healthy cells grow and divide in an orderly way. Mutations in certain genes can cause cells to continue dividing even when new cells aren't needed. In the colon and rectum, this unregulated growth can cause polyps to form. Polyps can develop anywhere in your large intestine.
There are two main categories of polyps, non-neoplastic and neoplastic. Non-neoplastic polyps include hyperplastic polyps, inflammatory polyps and hamartomatous polyps. Non-neoplastic polyps typically do not become cancerous.
Inflammatory polyps may be seen with ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease of the colon. Although the polyps themselves are not a significant threat, having ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease of the colon increases your overall risk of colon cancer.
Neoplastic polyps include adenomas and serrated types. Most colon polyps are adenomas. Serrated polyps may become cancerous, depending on their size and location in the colon. In general, the larger a polyp, the greater the risk of cancer, especially with neoplastic polyps.
Factors that may contribute to the formation of colon polyps or cancer include:
Age. Most people with colon polyps are 50 or older.
Inflammatory intestinal conditions, such as ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
Family history. You're more likely to develop colon polyps or cancer if you have a parent, sibling or child with them. If many family members have them, your risk is even greater. In some people, this connection isn't hereditary.
Tobacco and alcohol use.
Obesity and lack of exercise.
Race. African-Americans are at higher risk of developing colon cancer.
Type 2 diabetes that isn't well-controlled.
Rarely, people inherit genetic mutations that cause colon polyps to form. If you have one of these genetic mutations, you are at much higher risk of developing colorectal cancer. Screening and early detection can help prevent the development or spread of these cancers.
Hereditary disorders that cause colon polyps include:
Lynch syndrome, also called hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. People with Lynch syndrome tend to develop relatively few colon polyps, but those polyps can quickly become malignant. Lynch syndrome is the most common form of inherited colon cancer and is also associated with tumors in the breast, stomach, small intestine, urinary tract and ovaries.
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), a rare disorder that causes hundreds or even thousands of polyps to develop in the lining of your colon beginning during your teenage years. If the polyps aren't treated, your risk of developing colon cancer is nearly 100 percent, usually before age 40. Genetic testing can help determine your risk of FAP .
Gardner's syndrome, a variant of FAP that causes polyps to develop throughout your colon and small intestine. You may also develop noncancerous tumors in other parts of your body, including your skin, bones and abdomen.
MYH-associated polyposis (MAP), a condition similar to FAP that is caused by mutations in the MYH gene. People with MAP often develop multiple adenomatous polyps and colon cancer at a young age. Genetic testing can help determine your risk of MAP.
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, a condition that usually begins with freckles developing all over the body, including the lips, gums and feet. Then noncancerous polyps develop throughout the intestines. These polyps may become malignant, so people with this condition have an increased risk of colon cancer.
Serrated polyposis syndrome, a condition that leads to multiple serrated adenomatous polyps in the upper part of the colon. These polyps may become malignant.
Some colon polyps may become cancerous. The earlier polyps are removed, the less likely it is that they will become malignant.
You may have a color vision deficiency and not know it. Some people figure out that they or their child has the condition when it causes confusion — such as when there are problems differentiating the colors in a traffic light or interpreting color-coded learning materials.
People affected by color blindness may not be able to distinguish: Different shades of red and green, Different shades of blue and yellow, Any colors.
The most common color deficiency is an inability to see some shades of red and green. Often, a person who is red-green or blue-yellow deficient isn't completely insensitive to both colors. Defects can be mild, moderate or severe.
If you suspect you have problems distinguishing certain colors or your color vision changes, see an eye doctor for testing. It's important that children get comprehensive eye exams, including color vision testing, before starting school.
There's no cure for inherited color deficiencies, but if illness or eye disease is the cause, treatment may improve color vision.
Seeing colors across the light spectrum is a complex process that begins with your eyes' ability to respond to different wavelengths of light.
Light, which contains all color wavelengths, enters your eye through the cornea and passes through the lens and transparent, jellylike tissue in your eye (vitreous humor) to wavelength-sensitive cells (cones) at the back of your eye in the macular area of the retina. The cones are sensitive to short (blue), medium (green) or long (red) wavelengths of light. Chemicals in the cones trigger a reaction and send the wavelength information through your optic nerve to your brain.
If your eyes are normal, you perceive color. But if your cones lack one or more wavelength-sensitive chemicals, you will be unable to distinguish the colors red, green or blue.
Color blindness has several causes:
Inherited disorder. Inherited color deficiencies are much more common in males than in females. The most common color deficiency is red-green, with blue-yellow deficiency being much less common. It is rare to have no color vision at all.
You can inherit a mild, moderate or severe degree of the disorder. Inherited color deficiencies usually affect both eyes, and the severity doesn't change over your lifetime.
Diseases. Some conditions that can cause color deficits are sickle cell anemia, diabetes, macular degeneration, Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, glaucoma, Parkinson's disease, chronic alcoholism and leukemia. One eye may be more affected than the other, and the color deficit may get better if the underlying disease can be treated.
Certain medications. Some medications can alter color vision, such as some drugs that treat certain autoimmune diseases, heart problems, high blood pressure, erectile dysfunction, infections, nervous disorders and psychological problems.
Aging. Your ability to see colors deteriorates slowly as you age.
Chemicals. Exposure to some chemicals in the workplace, such as carbon disulfide and fertilizers, may cause loss of color vision.
The signs and symptoms of a coma commonly include: Closed eyes, Depressed brainstem reflexes, such as pupils not responding to light, No responses of limbs, except for reflex movements, No response to painful stimuli, except for reflex movements, Irregular breathing.
A coma is a medical emergency. Seek immediate medical care.
Many types of problems can cause coma. Some examples are:
Traumatic brain injuries. Traumatic brain injuries, often caused by traffic collisions or acts of violence, are common causes of comas.
Stroke. Reduced or interrupted blood supply to the brain (stroke), which may be caused by blocked arteries or a burst blood vessel, can result in a coma.
Tumors. Tumors in the brain or brainstem can cause a coma.
Diabetes. In people with diabetes, blood sugar levels that become too high (hyperglycemia) or too low (hypoglycemia) can cause a coma.
Lack of oxygen. People who have been rescued from drowning or those who have been resuscitated after a heart attack may not awaken due to lack of oxygen to the brain.
Infections. Infections such as encephalitis and meningitis cause swelling (inflammation) of the brain, spinal cord or the tissues that surround the brain. Severe cases of these infections can result in brain damage or a coma.
Seizures. Ongoing seizures may lead to a coma.
Toxins. Exposure to toxins, such as carbon monoxide or lead, can cause brain damage and a coma.
Drugs and alcohol. Overdosing on drugs or alcohol can result in a coma.
Although many people gradually recover from a coma, others enter a vegetative state or die. Some people who recover from a coma may have major or minor disabilities.
Complications may develop during a coma, including pressure sores, bladder infections, blood clots in the legs and other problems.
The first indication of the common cold in a baby is often: A congested or runny nose, Nasal discharge that may be clear at first but might thicken and turn yellow or green.
Other signs and symptoms of a common cold in a baby may include: Fever, Sneezing, Coughing, Decreased appetite, Irritability, Difficulty sleeping, Trouble nursing or taking a bottle due to nasal congestion.
Your baby's immune system will need time to mature. If your baby has a cold with no complications, it should resolve within 10 to 14 days.
If your baby is younger than 3 months of age, call the doctor early in the illness. In newborns, it's especially important to make sure that a more serious illness isn't present, especially if your baby has a fever.
Most colds are simply a nuisance. But it's important to take your baby's signs and symptoms seriously.
If your baby is 3 months old or older, call the doctor if your baby: Isn't wetting as many diapers as usual, Has a temperature higher than 100.4 F (38 C), Seems to have ear pain or is unusually irritable, Has red eyes or develops yellow or greenish eye discharge, Has trouble breathing, Has a persistent cough, Has thick, green nasal discharge for several days, Has other signs or symptoms that worry you, such as an unusual or alarming cry.
Seek medical help immediately if your baby: Refuses to nurse or accept fluids, Coughs hard enough to cause vomiting or changes in skin color, Coughs up blood-tinged sputum, Has difficulty breathing or is bluish around the lips.
The common cold is an infection of the nose and throat (upper respiratory tract infection) that can be caused by one of more than 100 viruses. Rhinoviruses are the most common.
Once infected by a virus, your baby generally becomes immune to that virus. But because so many viruses cause colds, your baby may have several colds a year and many throughout his or her lifetime. Also, some viruses don't produce lasting immunity.
A common cold virus enters your baby's mouth, nose or eyes. Your baby can be infected with a virus by:
Air. When someone who is sick coughs, sneezes or talks, he or she might directly spread the virus to your baby.
Direct contact. Someone with a cold who touches your baby's hand can spread the cold virus to your baby, who can become infected after touching his or her eyes, nose or mouth.
Contaminated surfaces. Some viruses live on surfaces for two hours or longer. Your baby may catch a virus by touching a contaminated surface, such as a toy.
A few factors put infants at higher risk of a common cold.
Immature immune systems. Infants are, by nature, at risk of common colds because they haven't yet been exposed to or developed resistance to most of the viruses that cause them.
Exposure to other children. Infants spend time with other children, who don't always wash their hands or cover their coughs and sneezes, which increases your baby's risk of catching a cold.
Time of year. Both children and adults are more susceptible to colds from fall to late spring.
Acute ear infection (otitis media). This is the most common complication of the common cold. Ear infections occur when bacteria or viruses enter the space behind the eardrum.
Wheezing. A cold can trigger wheezing, even if your child doesn't have asthma. If your child does have asthma, a cold can make it worse.
Sinusitis. A common cold that doesn't resolve may lead to a secondary infection within the sinuses (sinusitis).
Other secondary infections. These include pneumonia, bronchiolitis and croup. Such infections require evaluation by a doctor.
Symptoms of a common cold usually appear one to three days after exposure to a cold-causing virus. Signs and symptoms, which can vary from person to person, might include: Runny or stuffy nose, Sore throat, Cough, Congestion, Slight body aches or a mild headache, Sneezing, Low-grade fever, Generally feeling unwell (malaise).
The discharge from your nose may become thicker and yellow or green in color as a common cold runs its course. This isn't an indication of a bacterial infection.
For adults — seek medical attention if you have: Fever greater than 101.3 F (38.5 C), Fever lasting five days or more or returning after a fever-free period, Shortness of breath, Wheezing, Severe sore throat, headache or sinus pain.
For children — in general, your child doesn't need to see the doctor for a common cold. But seek medical attention right away if your child has any of the following: Fever of 100.4 F (38 C) in newborns up to 12 weeks, Rising fever or fever lasting more than two days in a child of any age, Symptoms that worsen or fail to improve, Severe symptoms, such as headache or cough, Wheezing, Ear pain, Extreme fussiness, Unusual drowsiness, Lack of appetite.
Although many types of viruses can cause a common cold, rhinoviruses are the most common culprit.
A cold virus enters your body through your mouth, eyes or nose. The virus can spread through droplets in the air when someone who is sick coughs, sneezes or talks.
It also spreads by hand-to-hand contact with someone who has a cold or by sharing contaminated objects, such as utensils, towels, toys or telephones. If you touch your eyes, nose or mouth after such contact or exposure, you're likely to catch a cold.
These factors can increase your chances of getting a cold:
Age. Children younger than 6 are at greatest risk of colds, especially if they spend time in child-care settings.
Weakened immune system. Having a chronic illness or otherwise weakened immune system increases your risk.
Time of year. Both children and adults are more susceptible to colds in fall and winter, but you can get a cold anytime.
Smoking. You're more likely to catch a cold and to have more-severe colds if you're exposed to cigarette smoke.
Exposure. If you're around many people, such as at school or on an airplane, you're likely to be exposed to viruses that cause colds.
Acute ear infection (otitis media). This occurs when bacteria or viruses enter the space behind the eardrum. Typical signs and symptoms include earaches and, in some cases, a green or yellow discharge from the nose or the return of a fever following a common cold.
Asthma. A cold can trigger an asthma attack.
Acute sinusitis. In adults or children, a common cold that doesn't resolve can lead to inflammation and infection of the sinuses (sinusitis).
Other secondary infections. These include strep throat (streptococcal pharyngitis), pneumonia, and croup or bronchiolitis in children. These infections need to be treated by a doctor.
The severity of symptoms can vary greatly between people with CVID. Symptoms of common variable immunodeficiency may appear during childhood or adolescence, though many people don't experience them until adulthood.
If you have CVID, you'll likely experience repeated infections before being diagnosed. The most common types of infections include pneumonia, sinusitis, ear infections and gastrointestinal infections.
Common warts usually occur on your fingers or hands and may be: Small, fleshy, grainy bumps, Flesh-colored, white, pink or tan, Rough to the touch, Sprinkled with black pinpoints, which are small, clotted blood vessels.
See your doctor for common warts if: The growths are painful or change in appearance or color, You've tried treating the warts, but they persist, spread or recur, The growths are bothersome and interfere with activities, You aren't sure whether the growths are warts, You are an adult and numerous warts begin to appear, which may indicate the immune system is malfunctioning.
Common warts are caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV). The virus is quite common and has more than 150 types, but only a few cause warts on your hands. Some strains of HPV are acquired through sexual contact. Most forms, however, are spread by casual skin contact or through shared objects, such as towels or washcloths. The virus usually spreads through breaks in your skin, such as a hangnail or a scrape. Biting your nails also can cause warts to spread on your fingertips and around your nails.
Each person's immune system responds to the HPV virus differently, so not everyone who comes in contact with HPV develops warts.
People at higher risk of developing common warts include: Children and young adults, because their bodies may not have built up immunity to the virus, People with weakened immune systems, such as those with HIV/AIDS or people who've had organ transplants.
Signs and symptoms of CRPS include: Continuous burning or throbbing pain, usually in your arm, leg, hand or foot, Sensitivity to touch or cold, Swelling of the painful area, Changes in skin temperature — alternating between sweaty and cold, Changes in skin color, ranging from white and blotchy to red or blue, Changes in skin texture, which may become tender, thin or shiny in the affected area, Changes in hair and nail growth, Joint stiffness, swelling and damage, Muscle spasms, tremors, weakness and loss (atrophy), Decreased ability to move the affected body part.
Symptoms may change over time and vary from person to person. Pain, swelling, redness, noticeable changes in temperature and hypersensitivity (particularly to cold and touch) usually occur first.
Over time, the affected limb can become cold and pale. It may undergo skin and nail changes as well as muscle spasms and tightening. Once these changes occur, the condition is often irreversible.
CRPS occasionally may spread from its source to elsewhere in your body, such as the opposite limb.
In some people, signs and symptoms of CRPS go away on their own. In others, signs and symptoms may persist for months to years. Treatment is likely to be most effective when started early in the course of the illness.
If you experience constant, severe pain that affects a limb and makes touching or moving that limb seem intolerable, see your doctor to determine the cause. It's important to treat CRPS early.
The cause of CRPS isn't completely understood. It's thought to be caused by an injury to or an abnormality of the peripheral and central nervous systems. CRPS typically occurs as a result of a trauma or an injury.
CRPS occurs in two types, with similar signs and symptoms, but different causes:
Type 1. Also known as reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD), this type occurs after an illness or injury that didn't directly damage the nerves in your affected limb. About 90% of people with CRPS have type 1.
Type 2. Once referred to as causalgia, this type has symptoms similar to those of type 1. But type 2 CRPS occurs after a distinct nerve injury.
Many cases of CRPS occur after a forceful trauma to an arm or a leg. This can include a crushing injury or a fracture.
Other major and minor traumas — such as surgery, heart attacks, infections and even sprained ankles — also can lead to CRPS.
It's not well understood why these injuries can trigger CRPS. Not everyone who has such an injury will go on to develop CRPS. It might be due to a dysfunctional interaction between your central and peripheral nervous systems and inappropriate inflammatory responses.
If CRPS isn't diagnosed and treated early, the disease may progress to more-disabling signs and symptoms. These may include:
Tissue wasting (atrophy). Your skin, bones and muscles may begin to deteriorate and weaken if you avoid or have trouble moving an arm or a leg because of pain or stiffness.
Muscle tightening (contracture). You also may experience tightening of your muscles. This may lead to a condition in which your hand and fingers or your foot and toes contract into a fixed position.
During the first few months after a loss, many signs and symptoms of normal grief are the same as those of complicated grief. However, while normal grief symptoms gradually start to fade over time, those of complicated grief linger or get worse. Complicated grief is like being in an ongoing, heightened state of mourning that keeps you from healing.
Signs and symptoms of complicated grief may include: Intense sorrow, pain and rumination over the loss of your loved one, Focus on little else but your loved one's death, Extreme focus on reminders of the loved one or excessive avoidance of reminders, Intense and persistent longing or pining for the deceased, Problems accepting the death, Numbness or detachment, Bitterness about your loss, Feeling that life holds no meaning or purpose, Lack of trust in others, Inability to enjoy life or think back on positive experiences with your loved one.
Complicated grief also may be indicated if you continue to: Have trouble carrying out normal routines, Isolate from others and withdraw from social activities, Experience depression, deep sadness, guilt or self-blame, Believe that you did something wrong or could have prevented the death, Feel life isn't worth living without your loved one, Wish you had died along with your loved one.
Contact your doctor or a mental health professional if you have intense grief and problems functioning that don't improve at least one year after the passing of your loved one.
At times, people with complicated grief may consider suicide. If you're thinking about suicide, talk to someone you trust. If you think you may act on suicidal feelings, call 911 or your local emergency services number right away. Or call a suicide hotline number. In the United States, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-TALK (800-273-8255) to reach a trained counselor.
It's not known what causes complicated grief. As with many mental health disorders, it may involve your environment, your personality, inherited traits and your body's natural chemical makeup.
Complicated grief occurs more often in females and with older age. Factors that may increase the risk of developing complicated grief include: An unexpected or violent death, such as death from a car accident, or the murder or suicide of a loved one, Death of a child, Close or dependent relationship to the deceased person, Social isolation or loss of a support system or friendships, Past history of depression, separation anxiety or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Traumatic childhood experiences, such as abuse or neglect, Other major life stressors, such as major financial hardships.
Complicated grief can affect you physically, mentally and socially. Without appropriate treatment, complications may include: Depression, Suicidal thoughts or behaviors, Anxiety, including PTSD, Significant sleep disturbances, Increased risk of physical illness, such as heart disease, cancer or high blood pressure, Long-term difficulty with daily living, relationships or work activities, Alcohol, nicotine use or substance misuse.
Signs and symptoms of compulsive gambling (gambling disorder) include: Being preoccupied with gambling, such as constantly planning how to get more gambling money, Needing to gamble with increasing amounts of money to get the same thrill, Trying to control, cut back or stop gambling, without success, Feeling restless or irritable when you try to cut down on gambling, Gambling to escape problems or relieve feelings of helplessness, guilt, anxiety or depression, Trying to get back lost money by gambling more (chasing losses), Lying to family members or others to hide the extent of your gambling, Jeopardizing or losing important relationships, a job, or school or work opportunities because of gambling, Resorting to theft or fraud to get gambling money, Asking others to bail you out of financial trouble because you gambled money away.
Unlike most casual gamblers who stop when losing or set a loss limit, people with a compulsive gambling problem are compelled to keep playing to recover their money — a pattern that becomes increasingly destructive over time.
Some people with a compulsive gambling problem may have remission where they gamble less or not at all for a period of time. However, without treatment, the remission usually isn't permanent.
Have family members, friends or co-workers expressed concern about your gambling? If so, listen to their worries. Because denial is almost always a feature of compulsive or addictive behavior, it may be difficult for you to realize that you have a problem.
If you recognize your own behavior from the list of signs and symptoms for compulsive gambling, seek professional help.
Exactly what causes someone to gamble compulsively isn't well-understood. Like many problems, compulsive gambling may result from a combination of biological, genetic and environmental factors.
Although most people who play cards or wager never develop a gambling problem, certain factors are more often associated with compulsive gambling:
Mental health disorders. People who gamble compulsively often have substance abuse problems, personality disorders, depression or anxiety. Compulsive gambling may also be associated with bipolar disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Age. Compulsive gambling is more common in younger and middle-aged people. Gambling during childhood or the teenage years increases the risk of developing compulsive gambling. However, compulsive gambling in the older adult population can also be a problem.
Sex. Compulsive gambling is more common in men than women. Women who gamble typically start later in life and may become addicted more quickly. But gambling patterns among men and women have become increasingly similar.
Family or friend influence. If your family members or friends have a gambling problem, the chances are greater that you will, too.
Medications used to treat Parkinson's disease and restless legs syndrome. Drugs called dopamine agonists have a rare side effect that may result in compulsive behaviors, including gambling, in some people.
Certain personality characteristics. Being highly competitive, a workaholic, impulsive, restless or easily bored may increase your risk of compulsive gambling.
Compulsive gambling can have profound and long-lasting consequences for your life, such as: Relationship problems, Financial problems, including bankruptcy, Legal problems or imprisonment, Poor work performance or job loss, Poor general health, Suicide, suicide attempts or suicidal thoughts.
Some indications that you may be struggling with compulsive sexual behavior include:
You have recurrent and intense sexual fantasies, urges and behaviors that take up a lot of your time and feel as if they're beyond your control.
You feel driven to do certain sexual behaviors, feel a release of the tension afterward, but also feel guilt or remorse.
You've tried unsuccessfully to reduce or control your sexual fantasies, urges or behavior.
You use compulsive sexual behavior as an escape from other problems, such as loneliness, depression, anxiety or stress.
You continue to engage in sexual behaviors that have serious consequences, such as the potential for getting or giving someone else a sexually transmitted infection, the loss of important relationships, trouble at work, financial strain, or legal problems.
You have trouble establishing and maintaining healthy and stable relationships.
Seek help if you feel you've lost control of your sexual behavior, especially if your behavior causes problems for you or other people.  Compulsive sexual behavior tends to escalate over time, so get help when you first recognize there may be a problem.
As you decide whether to seek professional help, ask yourself: Can I manage my sexual impulses?, Am I distressed by my sexual behaviors?, Is my sexual behavior hurting my relationships, affecting my work or resulting in negative consequences, such as getting arrested?, Do I try to hide my sexual behavior?.
Seeking help for compulsive sexual behavior can be difficult because it's such a deeply personal matter. Try to:
Set aside any shame or embarrassment and focus on the benefits of getting treatment.
Remember that you're not alone — many people struggle with compulsive sexual behavior. Mental health professionals are trained to be understanding and discreet. But not all mental health professionals are experienced in treating compulsive sexual behavior, so make sure you find a therapist who is competent in this area.
Keep in mind what you say to a doctor or mental health professional is kept confidential, except in cases where you report that you're going to hurt yourself or someone else, you report sexual abuse of a child, or you report abuse or neglect of someone in a vulnerable population.
Seek immediate treatment if: You think you may cause harm with uncontrolled sexual behavior, You have other problems with impulse control, and you feel like your sexual behavior is slipping out of control, You are suicidal — if you're thinking of attempting suicide, call 911 or your local emergency number, or the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (in the United States) at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255).
Although the causes of compulsive sexual behavior are unclear, they may include:
An imbalance of natural brain chemicals. Certain chemicals in your brain (neurotransmitters) such as serotonin, dopamine and norepinephrine help regulate your mood. High levels may be related to compulsive sexual behavior.
Changes in brain pathways. Compulsive sexual behavior may be an addiction that, over time, might cause changes in the brain's neural circuits, especially in the reinforcement centers of the brain. Like other addictions, more-intensive sexual content and stimulation are typically required over time in order to gain satisfaction or relief.
Conditions that affect the brain. Certain diseases or health problems, such as epilepsy and dementia, may cause damage to parts of the brain that affect sexual behavior. In addition, treatment of Parkinson's disease with some dopamine agonist medications may cause compulsive sexual behavior.
Compulsive sexual behavior can occur in both men and women, though it may be more common in men. It can also affect anyone, regardless of sexual orientation. Factors that may increase risk of compulsive sexual behavior include:
Ease of access to sexual content. Advances in technology and social media allow access to increasingly intensive sexual imagery and information.
Privacy. Secrecy and privacy of compulsive sexual activities tend to allow these problems to worsen over time.
Also, an increased risk of compulsive sexual behavior may occur in people who have: Alcohol or drug abuse problems, Another mental health condition, such as a mood disorder (such as depression or anxiety), or a gambling addiction, Family conflicts or family members with problems such as addiction, A history of physical or sexual abuse.
Compulsive sexual behavior can have many negative consequences that affect both you and others. You may: Struggle with feelings of guilt, shame and low self-esteem, Develop other mental health conditions, such as depression, suicide, severe distress and anxiety, Neglect or lie to your partner and family, harming or destroying meaningful relationships, Lose your focus or engage in sexual activity or search internet pornography at work, risking your job, Accumulate financial debts buying pornography and sexual services, Contract HIV, hepatitis or another sexually transmitted infection or pass a sexually transmitted infection to someone else, Engage in unhealthy substance use, such as using recreational drugs or drinking excessive alcohol, Be arrested for sexual offenses.
The signs and symptoms of a concussion can be subtle and may not show up immediately. Symptoms can last for days, weeks or even longer.
Common symptoms after a concussive traumatic brain injury are headache, loss of memory (amnesia) and confusion. The amnesia usually involves forgetting the event that caused the concussion.
Physical signs and symptoms of a concussion may include: Headache, Ringing in the ears, Nausea, Vomiting, Fatigue or drowsiness, Blurry vision.
Other signs and symptoms of a concussion include: Confusion or feeling as if in a fog, Amnesia surrounding the traumatic event, Dizziness or "seeing stars".
A witness may observe these signs and symptoms in the concussed person: Temporary loss of consciousness (though this doesn't always occur), Slurred speech, Delayed response to questions, Dazed appearance, Forgetfulness, such as repeatedly asking the same question.
You may have some symptoms of concussions immediately, and some can occur for days after the injury, such as: Concentration and memory complaints, Irritability and other personality changes, Sensitivity to light and noise, Sleep disturbances, Psychological adjustment problems and depression, Disorders of taste and smell.
Head trauma is very common in young children. But concussions can be difficult to recognize in infants and toddlers because they can't describe how they feel. Concussion clues may include: Dazed appearance, Listlessness and tiring easily, Irritability and crankiness, Loss of balance and unsteady walking, Excessive crying, Change in eating or sleeping patterns, Lack of interest in favorite toys, Vomiting, Seizures.
See a doctor within 1 to 2 days if: You or your child experiences a head injury, even if emergency care isn't required.
If your child doesn't have signs of a serious head injury, remains alert, moves normally and responds to you, the injury is probably mild and usually doesn't need further testing.
In this case, if your child wants to nap, it's OK to let him or her sleep. If worrisome signs develop later, seek emergency care.
Seek emergency care for an adult or child who experiences a head injury and signs and symptoms such as: Repeated vomiting or nausea, A loss of consciousness lasting longer than 30 seconds, A headache that gets worse over time, Fluid or blood draining from the nose or ears, Vision or eye disturbances, such as pupils that are bigger than normal (dilated pupils) or pupils of unequal sizes, Ringing in the ears that doesn't go away, Weakness in the arms or legs, Appearing very pale for longer than an hour, Changes in behavior, Confusion or disorientation, such as difficulty recognizing people or places, Slurred speech or other changes in speech, Obvious difficulty with mental function or physical coordination, Changes in physical coordination, such as stumbling or clumsiness, Seizures or convulsions, Lasting or recurrent dizziness, Symptoms that worsen over time, Large head bumps or bruises on areas other than the forehead in children, especially in infants under 12 months of age.
Never return to play or vigorous activity while signs or symptoms of a concussion are present.
Experts recommend that an athlete with a suspected concussion not return to activities that are associated with a higher risk of another concussion while still showing concussion symptoms.
Children and adolescents should be evaluated by a health care professional trained in evaluating and managing pediatric concussions.
Experts also recommend that adult, child and adolescent athletes with concussions not return to play on the same day as the injury.
Your brain has the consistency of gelatin. It's cushioned from everyday jolts and bumps by cerebrospinal fluid inside your skull.
A violent blow to your head and neck or upper body can cause your brain to slide back and forth forcefully against the inner walls of your skull.
Sudden acceleration or deceleration of the head, caused by events such as a car crash or being violently shaken, also can cause brain injury.
These injuries affect brain function, usually for a brief period, resulting in signs and symptoms of concussion.
This type of brain injury may lead to bleeding in or around your brain, causing symptoms such as prolonged drowsiness and confusion. These symptoms may develop immediately or later.
Such bleeding in your brain can be fatal. That's why anyone who experiences a brain injury needs monitoring in the hours afterward and emergency care if symptoms worsen.
Activities and factors that may increase your risk of a concussion include: Falling, especially in young children and older adults, Participating in a high-risk sport, such as football, hockey, soccer, rugby, boxing or other contact sport, Participating in high-risk sports without proper safety equipment and supervision, Being involved in a motor vehicle collision, Being involved in a pedestrian or bicycle accident, Being a soldier involved in combat, Being a victim of physical abuse, Having had a previous concussion.
Potential complications of concussion include:
Post-traumatic headaches. Some people experience concussion-related headaches up to seven days after a brain injury.
Post-traumatic vertigo. Some people experience a sense of spinning or dizziness for days, weeks or months after a brain injury.
Post-concussion syndrome. A small proportion of people (15% to 20%) may have symptoms including headaches, dizziness and thinking difficulties that persist beyond three weeks. If these symptoms persist beyond three months, this becomes characterized as post-concussion syndrome.
Cumulative effects of multiple brain injuries. Active research is currently underway to study the effects of repeated head injuries that don't cause symptoms (subconcussive injury). At this time, there's no conclusive evidence indicating that repeated brain injuries contribute to cumulative effects.
Second impact syndrome. Rarely, experiencing a second concussion before signs and symptoms of a first concussion have resolved may result in rapid and usually fatal brain swelling.
It's important for athletes never to return to sports while they're still experiencing signs and symptoms of concussion.
Signs and symptoms of CAH vary, depending on which gene is defective and the level of enzyme deficiency.
Female infants who have classic CAH may have a condition known as ambiguous genitalia, in which the clitoris is enlarged or the genitals look more like those of a male child. Male infants who have classic CAH have normal appearing genitals. Both male and female infants can be seriously affected by a lack of cortisol, aldosterone or both. This is known as an adrenal crisis, and it can be life-threatening.
The salt-losing form and simple-virilizing form of classic CAH cause children's bodies to produce an insufficient amount of cortisol. These children can have problems maintaining normal blood pressure, normal blood sugar and energy levels, and are more vulnerable to stress. An excess of the male sex hormones can result in short height and early puberty for both boys and girls.
Signs and symptoms of classic CAH in children and adults include: Appearance of pubic hair at a very early age, Rapid growth during childhood, but shorter than average final height.
Often there are no symptoms of nonclassic CAH when a baby is born. The condition is not identified on routine infant blood screening and usually becomes evident in late childhood or early adulthood. Cortisol may be the only hormone that's deficient.
Teenage and adult females who have nonclassic CAH may have normal appearing genitals at birth, but later in life, they may experience: Irregular or absent menstrual periods, Masculine characteristics such as facial hair, excessive body hair and a deepening voice, Severe acne.
In both females and males, signs of nonclassic CAH may also include: Early appearance of pubic hair, Rapid growth during childhood, an advanced bone age and shorter predicted final height.
Classic CAH is usually detected at birth through required newborn screening or when female babies have ambiguous genitalia. CAH may also be identified when male or female babies show signs of severe illness due to low levels of cortisol, aldosterone or both.
In children who have nonclassic CAH, signs and symptoms of early puberty may appear. If you have concerns about your child's growth or development, make an appointment with your child's doctor.
If you are pregnant and may be at risk of CAH because of your own medical history or your ethnicity, ask your doctor about genetic counseling.
The most common cause of CAH is the lack of the enzyme known as 21-hydroxylase. CAH may sometimes be called 21-hydroxylase deficiency. There are other much rarer enzyme deficiencies that also cause CAH.
Children who have the condition have two parents who either have CAH themselves or who are both carriers of the genetic mutation that causes the condition. This is known as the autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.
Factors that increase the risk of having CAH include: Parents who both have CAH or are both carriers of the genetic defect for the disorder, Certain ethnic heritages, such as Ashkenazi Jew, but also Hispanic, Italian, Yugoslav and Yupik Inuit.
People who have classic CAH are at risk of adrenal crisis because they have very low levels of cortisol in the blood. This can cause diarrhea, vomiting, dehydration, low blood sugar levels and shock. Adrenal crisis is a life-threatening medical emergency that requires immediate treatment. Aldosterone also may be low, which leads to dehydration and low sodium and high potassium levels. The nonclassic form of CAH doesn't cause adrenal crisis.
Males and females who have either classic or nonclassic CAH may also experience fertility problems.
Signs and symptoms vary depending on the type of congenital myopathy. The severity of signs and symptoms also varies, though the conditions are often stable or slowly progressing.
Common signs and symptoms include: Lack of muscle tone, Muscle weakness, Delayed motor skills, Noticeable facial weakness, Drooping eyelids, Muscle cramps or contractions.
There are different types of congenital myopathies, some of which include:
Central core disease. This condition causes muscle weakness and developmental problems. Some people may develop a significant reaction to general anesthesia (malignant hyperthermia).
Centronuclear myopathies. These rare conditions cause muscle weakness in the face, arms, legs and eye muscles, and breathing problems.
Congenital fiber type disproportion myopathy. Small fibers are found on muscle tissue during a biopsy. This condition causes muscle weakness in the face, neck, arms, legs and trunk.
Nemaline myopathy. Nemaline myopathy is one of the more common congenital myopathies and causes muscle weakness in the face, neck, arms and legs, and sometimes scoliosis. It may also cause breathing and feeding problems.
Multiminicore disease. This condition has several subtypes and often causes severe muscle weakness in the arms and legs, and scoliosis.
Myotubular myopathy. This rare condition, which occurs only in males, causes muscle weakness, floppiness and breathing problems.
Other myopathies. Other rare myopathies include autophagic vacuolar myopathy, cap disease, congenital myopathy with arrest of myogenesis, myosin storage (hyaline body) myopathy and zebra body myopathy.
Congenital myopathies are usually noticed at birth. But if you notice a lack of muscle tone or delayed motor skills as your baby grows, let your child's doctor know about your concerns.
Congenital myopathies are caused by one or more genetic abnormalities in genes that control muscle development.
The only known risk factor for congenital myopathies is having a blood relative with one of these conditions, or one or both parents who carry a mutated gene that causes them.
Congenital myopathies are associated with a number of complications, such as: Delays in motor skills, Scoliosis, Pneumonia, Respiratory failure, Feeding problems.
There are no specific signs or symptoms that indicate a conjoined twin pregnancy. As with other twin pregnancies, the uterus may grow faster than with a single fetus, and there may be more fatigue, nausea and vomiting early in the pregnancy. Conjoined twins can be diagnosed early in the pregnancy using standard ultrasound.
Conjoined twins are typically classified according to where they're joined, usually at matching sites, and sometimes at more than one site. They sometimes share organs or other parts of their bodies. The specific anatomy of each pair of conjoined twins is unique.
Conjoined twins may be joined at any of these sites:
Chest. Thoracopagus (thor-uh-KOP-uh-gus) twins are joined face to face at the chest. They often have a shared heart and may also share one liver and upper intestine. This is one of the most common sites of conjoined twins.
Abdomen. Omphalopagus (om-fuh-LOP-uh-gus) twins are joined near the bellybutton. Many omphalopagus twins share the liver, and some share the lower part of the small intestine (ileum) and colon. They generally do not share a heart.
Base of spine. Pygopagus (pie-GOP-uh-gus) twins are commonly joined back to back at the base of the spine and the buttocks. Some pygopagus twins share the lower gastrointestinal tract, and a few share the genital and urinary organs.
Length of spine. Rachipagus (ray-KIP-uh-gus), also called rachiopagus (ray-kee-OP-uh-gus), twins are joined back to back along the length of the spine. This type is very rare.
Pelvis. Ischiopagus (is-kee-OP-uh-gus) twins are joined at the pelvis, either face to face or end to end. Many ischiopagus twins share the lower gastrointestinal tract, as well as the liver and genital and urinary tract organs. Each twin may have two legs or, less commonly, the twins share two or three legs.
Trunk. Parapagus (pa-RAP-uh-gus) twins are joined side to side at the pelvis and part or all of the abdomen and chest, but with separate heads. The twins can have two, three or four arms and two or three legs.
Head. Craniopagus (kray-nee-OP-uh-gus) twins are joined at the back, top or side of the head, but not the face. Craniopagus twins share a portion of the skull. But their brains are usually separate, though they may share some brain tissue.
Head and chest. Cephalopagus (sef-uh-LOP-uh-gus) twins are joined at the face and upper body. The faces are on opposite sides of a single shared head, and they share a brain. These twins rarely survive.
In rare cases, twins may be conjoined with one twin smaller and less fully formed than the other (asymmetric conjoined twins). In extremely rare cases, one twin may be found partially developed within the other twin (fetus in fetu).
Identical twins (monozygotic twins) occur when a single fertilized egg splits and develops into two individuals. Eight to 12 days after conception, the embryonic layers that will split to form monozygotic twins begin to develop into specific organs and structures.
It's believed that when the embryo splits later than this — usually between 13 and 15 days after conception — separation stops before the process is complete, and the resulting twins are conjoined.
An alternative theory suggests that two separate embryos may somehow fuse together in early development.
What might cause either scenario to occur is unknown.
Because conjoined twins are so rare, and the cause isn't clear, it's unknown what might make some couples more likely to have conjoined twins.
Pregnancy with conjoined twins is complex and greatly increases the risk of serious complications. Conjoined babies require surgical delivery by cesarean section (C-section) due to their anatomy.
As with twins, conjoined babies are likely to be born prematurely, and one or both could be stillborn or die shortly after birth. Severe health issues for twins can occur immediately — such as trouble breathing or heart problems — and later in life, such as scoliosis, cerebral palsy or learning disabilities.
Potential complications depend on where the twins are joined, which organs or other parts of the body they share, and the expertise and experience of the health care team. When conjoined twins are expected, the family and the health care team need to discuss in detail the possible complications and how to prepare for them.
Signs and symptoms of constipation in children may include: Less than three bowel movements a week, Bowel movements that are hard, dry and difficult to pass, Pain while having a bowel movement, Stomach pain, Traces of liquid or pasty stool in your child's underwear — a sign that stool is backed up in the rectum, Blood on the surface of hard stool.
If your child fears that having a bowel movement will hurt, he or she may try to avoid it. You may notice your child crossing his or her legs, clenching his or her buttocks, twisting his or her body, or making faces when attempting to hold stool.
Constipation in children usually isn't serious. However, chronic constipation may lead to complications or signal an underlying condition. Take your child to a doctor if the constipation lasts longer than two weeks or is accompanied by: Fever, Not eating, Blood in the stool, Abdominal swelling, Weight loss, Pain during bowel movements, Part of the intestine coming out of the anus (rectal prolapse).
Constipation most commonly occurs when waste or stool moves too slowly through the digestive tract, causing the stool to become hard and dry.
Many factors can contribute to constipation in children, including:
Withholding. Your child may ignore the urge to have a bowel movement because he or she is afraid of the toilet or doesn't want to take a break from play. Some children withhold when they're away from home because they're uncomfortable using public toilets.
Painful bowel movements caused by large, hard stools also may lead to withholding. If it hurts to poop, your child may try to avoid a repeat of the distressing experience.
Toilet training issues. If you begin toilet training too soon, your child may rebel and hold in stool. If toilet training becomes a battle of wills, a voluntary decision to ignore the urge to poop can quickly become an involuntary habit that's tough to change.
Changes in diet. Not enough fiber-rich fruits and vegetables or fluid in your child's diet may cause constipation. One of the more common times for children to become constipated is when they're switching from an all-liquid diet to one that includes solid foods.
Changes in routine. Any changes in your child's routine — such as travel, hot weather or stress — can affect bowel function. Children are also more likely to experience constipation when they first start school outside of the home.
Medications. Certain antidepressants and various other drugs can contribute to constipation.
Cow's milk allergy. An allergy to cow's milk or consuming too many dairy products (cheese and cow's milk) sometimes leads to constipation.
Family history. Children who have family members who have experienced constipation are more likely to develop constipation. This may be due to shared genetic or environmental factors.
Medical conditions. Rarely, constipation in children indicates an anatomic malformation, a metabolic or digestive system problem, or another underlying condition.
Constipation in children is more likely to affect kids who: Are sedentary, Don't eat enough fiber, Don't drink enough fluids, Take certain medications, including some antidepressants, Have a medical condition affecting the anus or rectum, Have a neurological disorder.
Although constipation in children can be uncomfortable, it usually isn't serious. If constipation becomes chronic, however, complications may include: Painful breaks in the skin around the anus (anal fissures), Rectal prolapse, when the rectum comes out of the anus, Stool withholding, Avoiding bowel movements because of pain, which causes impacted stool to collect in the colon and rectum and leak out (encopresis).
Signs and symptoms of chronic constipation include: Passing fewer than three stools a week, Having lumpy or hard stools, Straining to have bowel movements, Feeling as though there's a blockage in your rectum that prevents bowel movements, Feeling as though you can't completely empty the stool from your rectum, Needing help to empty your rectum, such as using your hands to press on your abdomen and using a finger to remove stool from your rectum.
Constipation may be considered chronic if you've experienced two or more of these symptoms for the last three months.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you experience unexplained and persistent changes in your bowel habits.
Constipation most commonly occurs when waste or stool moves too slowly through the digestive tract or cannot be eliminated effectively from the rectum, which may cause the stool to become hard and dry. Chronic constipation has many possible causes.
Blockages in the colon or rectum may slow or stop stool movement. Causes include: Tiny tears in the skin around the anus (anal fissure), A blockage in the intestines (bowel obstruction), Colon cancer, Narrowing of the colon (bowel stricture), Other abdominal cancer that presses on the colon, Rectal cancer, Rectum bulge through the back wall of the vagina (rectocele).
Neurological problems can affect the nerves that cause muscles in the colon and rectum to contract and move stool through the intestines. Causes include: Damage to the nerves that control bodily functions (autonomic neuropathy), Multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, Spinal cord injury, Stroke.
Problems with the pelvic muscles involved in having a bowel movement may cause chronic constipation. These problems may include: The inability to relax the pelvic muscles to allow for a bowel movement (anismus), Pelvic muscles that don't coordinate relaxation and contraction correctly (dyssynergia), Weakened pelvic muscles.
Hormones help balance fluids in your body. Diseases and conditions that upset the balance of hormones may lead to constipation, including: Diabetes, Overactive parathyroid gland (hyperparathyroidism), Pregnancy, Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism).
Factors that may increase your risk of chronic constipation include: Being an older adult, Being a woman, Being dehydrated, Eating a diet that's low in fiber, Getting little or no physical activity, Taking certain medications, including sedatives, opioid pain medications, some antidepressants or medications to lower blood pressure, Having a mental health condition such as depression or an eating disorder.
Complications of chronic constipation include:
Swollen veins in your anus (hemorrhoids). Straining to have a bowel movement may cause swelling in the veins in and around your anus.
Torn skin in your anus (anal fissure). A large or hard stool can cause tiny tears in the anus.
Stool that can't be expelled (fecal impaction). Chronic constipation may cause an accumulation of hardened stool that gets stuck in your intestines.
Intestine that protrudes from the anus (rectal prolapse). Straining to have a bowel movement can cause a small amount of the rectum to stretch and protrude from the anus.
Contact dermatitis usually occurs on areas of your body that have been directly exposed to the reaction-causing substance — for example, along a calf that brushed against poison ivy or under a watchband. The rash usually develops within minutes to hours of exposure and can last two to four weeks.
Signs and symptoms of contact dermatitis include: A red rash, Itching, which may be severe, Dry, cracked, scaly skin, Bumps and blisters, sometimes with oozing and crusting, Swelling, burning or tenderness.
See your doctor if: The rash is so uncomfortable that you are losing sleep or are distracted from your daily activities, The rash is sudden, painful, severe or widespread, You're embarrassed by the way your skin looks, The rash doesn't get better within three weeks, The rash affects your face or genitals.
Seek immediate medical care in the following situations:
You think your skin is infected. Clues include fever and pus oozing from blisters.
Your lungs, eyes or nasal passages are painful and inflamed, perhaps from inhaling an allergen.
You think the rash has damaged the mucous lining of your mouth and digestive tract.
Contact dermatitis is caused by a substance you're exposed to that irritates your skin or triggers an allergic reaction. The substance could be one of thousands of known allergens and irritants. Some of these substances may cause both irritant contact dermatitis and allergic contact dermatitis.
Irritant contact dermatitis is the most common type. This nonallergic skin reaction occurs when a substance damages your skin's outer protective layer.
Some people react to strong irritants after a single exposure. Others may develop signs and symptoms after repeated exposures to even mild irritants. And some people develop a tolerance to the substance over time.
Common irritants include: Solvents, Rubbing alcohol, Bleach and detergents, Shampoos, permanent wave solutions, Airborne substances, such as sawdust or wool dust, Plants, Fertilizers and pesticides.
Allergic contact dermatitis occurs when a substance to which you're sensitive (allergen) triggers an immune reaction in your skin. It usually affects only the area that came into contact with the allergen. But it may be triggered by something that enters your body through foods, flavorings, medicine, or medical or dental procedures (systemic contact dermatitis).
You may become sensitized to a strong allergen such as poison ivy after a single exposure. Weaker allergens may require multiple exposures over several years to trigger an allergy. Once you develop an allergy to a substance, even a small amount of it can cause a reaction.
Common allergens include: Nickel, which is used in jewelry, buckles and many other items, Medications, such as antibiotic creams and oral antihistamines, Balsam of Peru, which is used in many products, such as perfumes, cosmetics, mouth rinses and flavorings, Formaldehyde, which is in preservatives, disinfectants and clothing, Personal care products, such as deodorants, body washes, hair dyes, cosmetics and nail polish, Plants such as poison ivy and mango, which contain a highly allergenic substance called urushiol, Airborne substances, such as ragweed pollen and spray insecticides, Products that cause a reaction when you're in the sun (photoallergic contact dermatitis), such as some sunscreens and oral medications.
Children develop the condition from the usual offenders and also from exposure to diapers, baby wipes, sunscreens, clothing with snaps or dyes, and so on.
Some jobs and hobbies put you at higher risk of contact dermatitis. Examples include: Health care and dental employees, Metalworkers, Construction workers, Hairdressers and cosmetologists, Auto mechanics, Scuba divers or swimmers, due to the rubber in face masks or goggles, Cleaners, Gardeners and agricultural workers, Cooks and others who work with food.
Contact dermatitis can lead to an infection if you repeatedly scratch the affected area, causing it to become wet and oozing. This creates a good place for bacteria or fungi to grow and may cause an infection.
Not everyone with convergence insufficiency has signs and symptoms. Signs and symptoms occur while you're reading or doing other close work and might include: Tired, sore or uncomfortable eyes (eyestrain), Headaches, Difficulty reading — words seem to float on the page, you lose your place or you read slowly — which might cause you to avoid reading or not complete schoolwork, Double vision (diplopia), Difficulty concentrating, Squinting, rubbing or closing one eye.
If you or your child has symptoms of convergence insufficiency or problems reading, consult an eye care professional — an ophthalmologist or an optometrist.
The cause of convergence insufficiency isn't known, but it involves a misalignment of the eyes when focusing on nearby objects. The misalignment involves the muscles that move the eye. Typically, one eye drifts outward when you're focusing on a word or object at close range.
Difficulties with reading and concentrating can affect a child's learning. Convergence insufficiency does not cause learning disabilities, but it makes using your eyes difficult and tiring.
Convergence insufficiency typically isn't detected in routine eye exams or school-based vision screenings. Reading difficulties of children with the condition might lead to an evaluation for learning disabilities, but it's important to rule out this eye disorder.
COPD symptoms often don't appear until significant lung damage has occurred, and they usually worsen over time, particularly if smoking exposure continues.
Signs and symptoms of COPD may include: Shortness of breath, especially during physical activities, Wheezing, Chest tightness, A chronic cough that may produce mucus (sputum) that may be clear, white, yellow or greenish, Frequent respiratory infections, Lack of energy, Unintended weight loss (in later stages), Swelling in ankles, feet or legs.
People with COPD are also likely to experience episodes called exacerbations, during which their symptoms become worse than the usual day-to-day variation and persist for at least several days.
Talk to your doctor if your symptoms are not improving with treatment or getting worse, or if you notice symptoms of an infection, such as fever or a change in sputum.
Seek immediate medical care if you can't catch your breath, if you experience severe blueness of your lips or fingernail beds (cyanosis) or a rapid heartbeat, or if you feel foggy and have trouble concentrating.
The main cause of COPD in developed countries is tobacco smoking. In the developing world, COPD often occurs in people exposed to fumes from burning fuel for cooking and heating in poorly ventilated homes.
Only some chronic smokers develop clinically apparent COPD, although many smokers with long smoking histories may develop reduced lung function. Some smokers develop less common lung conditions. They may be misdiagnosed as having COPD until a more thorough evaluation is performed.
Air travels down your windpipe (trachea) and into your lungs through two large tubes (bronchi). Inside your lungs, these tubes divide many times — like the branches of a tree — into many smaller tubes (bronchioles) that end in clusters of tiny air sacs (alveoli).
The air sacs have very thin walls full of tiny blood vessels (capillaries). The oxygen in the air you inhale passes into these blood vessels and enters your bloodstream. At the same time, carbon dioxide — a gas that is a waste product of metabolism — is exhaled.
Your lungs rely on the natural elasticity of the bronchial tubes and air sacs to force air out of your body. COPD causes them to lose their elasticity and over-expand, which leaves some air trapped in your lungs when you exhale.
Causes of airway obstruction include:
Emphysema. This lung disease causes destruction of the fragile walls and elastic fibers of the alveoli. Small airways collapse when you exhale, impairing airflow out of your lungs.
Chronic bronchitis. In this condition, your bronchial tubes become inflamed and narrowed and your lungs produce more mucus, which can further block the narrowed tubes. You develop a chronic cough trying to clear your airways.
In the vast majority of people with COPD, the lung damage that leads to COPD is caused by long-term cigarette smoking. But there are likely other factors at play in the development of COPD, such as a genetic susceptibility to the disease, because not all smokers develop COPD.
Other irritants can cause COPD, including cigar smoke, secondhand smoke, pipe smoke, air pollution, and workplace exposure to dust, smoke or fumes.
In about 1% of people with COPD, the disease results from a genetic disorder that causes low levels of a protein called alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAt). AAt is made in the liver and secreted into the bloodstream to help protect the lungs. Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency can cause liver disease, lung disease or both.
For adults with COPD related to AAt deficiency, treatment options include those used for people with more-common types of COPD. In addition, some people can be treated by replacing the missing AAt protein, which may prevent further damage to the lungs.
Risk factors for COPD include:
Exposure to tobacco smoke. The most significant risk factor for COPD is long-term cigarette smoking. The more years you smoke and the more packs you smoke, the greater your risk. Pipe smokers, cigar smokers and marijuana smokers also may be at risk, as well as people exposed to large amounts of secondhand smoke.
People with asthma. Asthma, a chronic inflammatory airway disease, may be a risk factor for developing COPD. The combination of asthma and smoking increases the risk of COPD even more.
Occupational exposure to dusts and chemicals. Long-term exposure to chemical fumes, vapors and dusts in the workplace can irritate and inflame your lungs.
Exposure to fumes from burning fuel. In the developing world, people exposed to fumes from burning fuel for cooking and heating in poorly ventilated homes are at higher risk of developing COPD.
Genetics. The uncommon genetic disorder alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency is the cause of some cases of COPD. Other genetic factors likely make certain smokers more susceptible to the disease.
COPD can cause many complications, including:
Respiratory infections. People with COPD are more likely to catch colds, the flu and pneumonia. Any respiratory infection can make it much more difficult to breathe and could cause further damage to lung tissue.
Heart problems. For reasons that aren't fully understood, COPD can increase your risk of heart disease, including heart attack
Lung cancer. People with COPD have a higher risk of developing lung cancer.
High blood pressure in lung arteries. COPD may cause high blood pressure in the arteries that bring blood to your lungs (pulmonary hypertension).
Depression. Difficulty breathing can keep you from doing activities that you enjoy. And dealing with serious illness can contribute to the development of depression.
You may have a corn or a callus if you notice: A thick, rough area of skin, A hardened, raised bump, Tenderness or pain under your skin, Flaky, dry or waxy skin.
Corns and calluses are not the same thing.
Corns are smaller than calluses and have a hard center surrounded by inflamed skin. Corns tend to develop on parts of your feet that don't bear weight, such as the tops and sides of your toes and even between your toes. They can also be found in weight-bearing areas. Corns can be painful when pressed.
Calluses are rarely painful. They usually develop on the soles of your feet, especially under the heels or balls, on your palms, or on your knees. Calluses vary in size and shape and are often larger than corns.
If a corn or callus becomes very painful or inflamed, see your doctor. If you have diabetes or poor blood flow, call your doctor before self-treating a corn or callus because even a minor injury to your foot can lead to an infected open sore (ulcer).
Pressure and friction from repetitive actions cause corns and calluses to develop and grow. Some sources of this pressure and friction include:
Wearing ill-fitting shoes. Tight shoes and high heels can compress areas of your feet. When footwear is too loose, your foot may repeatedly slide and rub against the shoe. Your foot may also rub against a seam or stitch inside the shoe.
Skipping socks. Wearing shoes and sandals without socks can cause friction on your feet. Socks that don't fit properly also can be a problem.
Playing instruments or using hand tools. Calluses on your hands may result from the repeated pressure of playing instruments, using hand tools or even writing.
These factors may increase your risk of corns and calluses:
Bunions. A bunion is an abnormal, bony bump that forms on the joint at the base of your big toe.
Hammertoe. A hammertoe is a deformity in which your toe curls like a claw.
Other foot deformities. Certain conditions, such as a bone spur, can cause constant rubbing inside your shoe.
Not protecting your hands. Using hand tools without wearing gloves exposes your skin to excessive friction.
If your coronary arteries narrow, they can't supply enough oxygen-rich blood to your heart — especially when it's beating hard, such as during exercise. At first, the decreased blood flow may not cause any symptoms. As plaque continues to build up in your coronary arteries, however, you may develop the following coronary artery disease signs and symptoms:
Chest pain (angina). You may feel pressure or tightness in your chest, as if someone were standing on your chest. This pain, called angina, usually occurs on the middle or left side of the chest. Angina is generally triggered by physical or emotional stress. The pain usually goes away within minutes after stopping the stressful activity. In some people, especially women, the pain may be brief or sharp and felt in the neck, arm or back.
Shortness of breath. If your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs, you may develop shortness of breath or extreme fatigue with activity.
Heart attack. A completely blocked coronary artery will cause a heart attack. The classic signs and symptoms of a heart attack include crushing pressure in your chest and pain in your shoulder or arm, sometimes with shortness of breath and sweating.
Women are somewhat more likely than men are to have less typical signs and symptoms of a heart attack, such as neck or jaw pain. And they may have other symptoms such as shortness of breath, fatigue and nausea.
Sometimes a heart attack occurs without any apparent signs or symptoms.
If you think you're having a heart attack, immediately call 911 or your local emergency number. If you don't have access to emergency medical services, have someone drive you to the nearest hospital. Drive yourself only as a last option.
If you have risk factors for coronary artery disease — such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol, tobacco use, diabetes, obesity a strong family history of heart disease — talk to your doctor. Your doctor may want to test you for coronary artery disease, especially if you have signs or symptoms of narrowed arteries.
Coronary artery disease is thought to begin with damage or injury to the inner layer of a coronary artery, sometimes as early as childhood. The damage may be caused by various factors, including: Smoking, High blood pressure, High cholesterol, Diabetes or insulin resistance, Not being active (sedentary lifestyle).
Once the inner wall of an artery is damaged, fatty deposits (plaque) made of cholesterol and other cellular waste products tend to collect at the site of injury. This process is called atherosclerosis. If the plaque surface breaks or ruptures, blood cells called platelets clump together at the site to try to repair the artery. This clump can block the artery, leading to a heart attack.
Risk factors for coronary artery disease include:
Age. Getting older increases your risk of damaged and narrowed arteries.
Sex. Men are generally at greater risk of coronary artery disease. However, the risk for women increases after menopause.
Family history. A family history of heart disease is associated with a higher risk of coronary artery disease, especially if a close relative developed heart disease at an early age. Your risk is highest if your father or a brother was diagnosed with heart disease before age 55 or if your mother or a sister developed it before age 65.
Smoking. People who smoke have a significantly increased risk of heart disease. Breathing in secondhand smoke also increases a person's risk of coronary artery disease.
High blood pressure. Uncontrolled high blood pressure can result in hardening and thickening of your arteries, narrowing the channel through which blood can flow.
High blood cholesterol levels. High levels of cholesterol in your blood can increase the risk of formation of plaque and atherosclerosis. High cholesterol can be caused by a high level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, known as the "bad" cholesterol. A low level of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, known as the "good" cholesterol, can also contribute to the development of atherosclerosis.
Diabetes. Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of coronary artery disease. Type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease share similar risk factors, such as obesity and high blood pressure.
Overweight or obesity. Excess weight typically worsens other risk factors.
Physical inactivity. Lack of exercise also is associated with coronary artery disease and some of its risk factors, as well.
High stress. Unrelieved stress in your life may damage your arteries as well as worsen other risk factors for coronary artery disease.
Unhealthy diet. Eating too much food that has high amounts of saturated fat, trans fat, salt and sugar can increase your risk of coronary artery disease.
Risk factors often occur together and one may trigger another. For instance, obesity can lead to type 2 diabetes and high blood pressure. When grouped together, certain risk factors make you even more likely to develop coronary artery disease. For example, metabolic syndrome — a cluster of conditions that includes high blood pressure; high triglycerides; low HDL, or "good," cholesterol; high insulin levels and excess body fat around the waist — increases the risk of coronary artery disease.
Sometimes coronary artery disease develops without any classic risk factors. Researchers are studying other possible risk factors, including:
Sleep apnea. This disorder causes you to repeatedly stop and start breathing while you're sleeping. Sudden drops in blood oxygen levels that occur during sleep apnea increase blood pressure and strain the cardiovascular system, possibly leading to coronary artery disease.
High-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP). This protein appears in higher-than-normal amounts when there's inflammation somewhere in your body. High hs-CRP levels may be a risk factor for heart disease. It's thought that as coronary arteries narrow, you'll have more hs-CRP in your blood.
High triglycerides. This is a type of fat (lipid) in your blood. High levels may raise the risk of coronary artery disease, especially for women.
Homocysteine. Homocysteine is an amino acid your body uses to make protein and to build and maintain tissue. But high levels of homocysteine may increase your risk of coronary artery disease.
Preeclampsia. This condition that can develop in women during pregnancy causes high blood pressure and a higher amount of protein in urine. It can lead to a higher risk of heart disease later in life.
Alcohol use. Heavy alcohol use can lead to heart muscle damage. It can also worsen other risk factors of coronary artery disease.
Autoimmune diseases. People who have conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus (and other inflammatory conditions) have an increased risk of atherosclerosis.
Coronary artery disease can lead to:
Chest pain (angina). When your coronary arteries narrow, your heart may not receive enough blood when demand is greatest — particularly during physical activity. This can cause chest pain (angina) or shortness of breath.
Heart attack. If a cholesterol plaque ruptures and a blood clot forms, complete blockage of your heart artery may trigger a heart attack. The lack of blood flow to your heart may damage your heart muscle. The amount of damage depends in part on how quickly you receive treatment.
Heart failure. If some areas of your heart are chronically deprived of oxygen and nutrients because of reduced blood flow, or if your heart has been damaged by a heart attack, your heart may become too weak to pump enough blood to meet your body's needs. This condition is known as heart failure.
Abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia). Inadequate blood supply to the heart or damage to heart tissue can interfere with your heart's electrical impulses, causing abnormal heart rhythms.
Signs and symptoms of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) may appear two to 14 days after exposure. This time after exposure and before having symptoms is called the incubation period. Common signs and symptoms can include: Fever, Cough, Tiredness.
Early symptoms of COVID-19 may include a loss of taste or smell.
Other symptoms can include: Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, Muscle aches, Chills, Sore throat, Runny nose, Headache, Chest pain, Pink eye (conjunctivitis).
This list is not all inclusive. Other less common symptoms have been reported, such as rash, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. Children have similar symptoms to adults and generally have mild illness.
The severity of COVID-19 symptoms can range from very mild to severe. Some people may have only a few symptoms, and some people may have no symptoms at all. Some people may experience worsened symptoms, such as worsened shortness of breath and pneumonia, about a week after symptoms start.
People who are older have a higher risk of serious illness from COVID-19, and the risk increases with age. People who have existing chronic medical conditions also may have a higher risk of serious illness. Certain medical conditions that increase the risk of serious illness from COVID-19 include: Serious heart diseases, such as heart failure, coronary artery disease or cardiomyopathy, Cancer, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), Type 2 diabetes, Obesity or severe obesity, Smoking, Chronic kidney disease, Sickle cell disease, Weakened immune system from solid organ transplants.
Other conditions may increase the risk of serious illness, such as: Asthma, Liver disease, Overweight, Chronic lung diseases such as cystic fibrosis or pulmonary fibrosis, Brain and nervous system conditions, Weakened immune system from bone marrow transplant, HIV or some medications, Type 1 diabetes, High blood pressure.
This list is not all inclusive. Other underlying medical conditions may increase your risk of serious illness from COVID-19.
If you have COVID-19 symptoms or you've been in contact with someone diagnosed with COVID-19, contact your doctor or clinic right away for medical advice. Tell your health care team about your symptoms and possible exposure before you go to your appointment.
If you have emergency COVID-19 signs and symptoms, seek care immediately. Emergency signs and symptoms can include: Trouble breathing, Persistent chest pain or pressure, Inability to stay awake, New confusion, Blue lips or face.
If you have signs or symptoms of COVID-19, contact your doctor or clinic for guidance. Let your doctor know if you have other chronic medical conditions, such as heart disease or lung disease. During the pandemic, it's important to make sure health care is available for those in greatest need.
Infection with the new coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, or SARS-CoV-2) causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads  easily among people, and more continues to be discovered over time about how it spreads. Data has shown that it spreads mainly from person to person among those in close contact (within about 6 feet, or 2 meters). The virus spreads by respiratory droplets released when someone with the virus coughs, sneezes or talks. These droplets can be inhaled or land in the mouth, nose or eyes of a person nearby.
In some situations, the COVID-19 virus can spread by a person being exposed to small droplets or aerosols that stay in the air for several minutes or hours — called airborne transmission. It's not yet known how common it is for the virus to spread this way.
It can also spread if a person touches a surface or object with the virus on it and then touches his or her mouth, nose or eyes, although this isn't considered to be a main way it spreads.
Risk factors for COVID-19 appear to include: Close contact (within 6 feet, or 2 meters) with someone who has COVID-19, Being coughed or sneezed on by an infected person.
Although most people with COVID-19 have mild to moderate symptoms, the disease can cause severe medical complications and lead to death in some people. Older adults or people with existing chronic medical conditions are at greater risk of becoming seriously ill with COVID-19.
Complications can include: Pneumonia and trouble breathing, Organ failure in several organs, Heart problems, A severe lung condition that causes a low amount of oxygen to go through your bloodstream to your organs (acute respiratory distress syndrome), Blood clots, Acute kidney injury, Additional viral and bacterial infections.
Signs and symptoms of corticobasal degeneration include: Difficulty moving on one or both sides of the body, which gets worse over time, Poor coordination, Trouble with balance, Stiffness, Abnormal postures of the hands or feet, such as a hand forming a clenched fist, Muscle jerks, Difficulty swallowing, Abnormal eye movements, Trouble with thinking, speech and language.
Corticobasal degeneration progresses over six to eight years. Eventually, people with corticobasal syndrome can become unable to walk.
The causes of corticobasal degeneration are unknown, but research suggests that a protein in the brain called tau may play a role in the disease. A buildup of tau in brain cells may lead to their deterioration and the symptoms of corticobasal degeneration.
It's important to know that you can have signs and symptoms that look like corticobasal degeneration but that are caused by another degenerative disease of the brain, such as progressive supranuclear palsy, Alzheimer's disease, Pick's disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Half of the people who have signs and symptoms of corticobasal degeneration have another disease.
The symptoms of corticobasal degeneration progress to serious complications, such as pneumonia or sepsis, a life-threatening response to an infection. Corticobasal degeneration complications ultimately lead to death.
The pain associated with costochondritis usually: Occurs on the left side of your breastbone, Is sharp, aching or pressure-like, Affects more than one rib, Worsens when you take a deep breath or cough.
If you have chest pain, you should seek emergency medical attention to rule out life-threatening causes such as a heart attack.
Costochondritis usually has no clear cause. Occasionally, however, costochondritis may be caused by:
Injury. A blow to the chest is one example.
Physical strain. Heavy lifting, strenuous exercise and severe coughing have been linked to costochondritis.
Arthritis. Costochondritis might be linked to specific problems, such as osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis or ankylosing spondylitis.
Joint infection. Viruses, bacteria and fungi — such as tuberculosis, syphilis and aspergillosis — can infect the rib joint.
Tumors. Noncancerous and cancerous tumors can cause costochondritis. Cancer might travel to the joint from another part of the body, such as the breast, thyroid or lung.
Costochondritis occurs most often in women and in people older than 40.
Tietze syndrome usually occurs in teenagers and young adults, and with equal frequency in men and women.
Begin suddenly with and just after coughing or other types of straining, Typically last a few seconds to a few minutes — some can last up to two hours, Cause sharp, stabbing or splitting pain, Are usually felt in the front of the head, Affect both sides of your head, May be followed by a dull, aching pain that lasts for hours.
Secondary cough headaches often have symptoms similar to those of primary cough headaches, though you may experience: Longer lasting headaches, Dizziness, Unsteadiness, Fainting, Numbness in the face or arms.
Consult your doctor if you experience sudden headaches after coughing — especially if the headaches are frequent or severe or you have any other troubling signs or symptoms, such as imbalance or blurred or double vision.
The cause of primary cough headaches is unknown.
Secondary cough headaches may be caused by:
A defect in the shape of the skull.
A defect in the cerebellum, the part of the brain that controls balance. This can occur when a portion of the brain is forced through the opening at the base of the skull (foramen magnum), where only the spinal cord is supposed to be.
Some of these types of defects are called Chiari malformations.
A weakness in one of the blood vessels in the brain (cerebral aneurysm).
A brain tumor.
A spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid leak.
Risk factors for primary cough headaches include:
Age. Primary cough headaches most often affect people older than age 40.
Sex. Men are more prone to getting primary cough headaches.
Risk factors for secondary cough headaches include: Being younger than age 40.
Common signs of cradle cap include: Patchy scaling or thick crusts on the scalp, Oily or dry skin covered with flaky white or yellow scales, Skin flakes, Possibly mild redness.
Similar scales may also be present on the ears, eyelids, nose and groin.
Cradle cap is common in newborns. It usually isn't itchy.
Cradle cap is the common term for infantile seborrheic dermatitis. It's sometimes confused with another skin condition, atopic dermatitis. A major difference between these conditions is that atopic dermatitis usually causes significant itching.
See your baby's doctor if: You've tried treating it at home without success, The patches spread to your baby's face or body.
The cause of cradle cap isn't known. One contributing factor may be hormones that pass from the mother to the baby before birth. These hormones can cause too much production of oil (sebum) in the oil glands and hair follicles.
Another factor may be a yeast (fungus) called malassezia (mal-uh-SEE-zhuh) that grows in the sebum along with bacteria. Antifungal treatments, such as ketoconazole, are often effective, supporting the idea that yeast is a contributing factor.
Cradle cap isn't contagious, and it's not caused by poor hygiene.
The signs of craniosynostosis are usually noticeable at birth, but they'll become more apparent during the first few months of your baby's life. Signs and severity depend on how many sutures are fused and when in brain development the fusion occurs. These can include: A misshapen skull, with the shape depending on which of the sutures are affected, An abnormal feeling or disappearing fontanel on your baby's skull, Development of a raised, hard ridge along affected sutures, Slow or no growth of the head as your baby grows.
There are several types of craniosynostosis. Most involve the fusion of a single cranial suture. Some complex forms of craniosynostosis involve the fusion of multiple sutures. Most cases of multiple suture craniosynostosis are linked to genetic syndromes and are called syndromic craniosynostosis.
The term given to each type of craniosynostosis depends on what sutures are affected. Types of craniosynostosis include:
Sagittal (scaphocephaly). Premature fusion of the sagittal suture that runs from the front to the back at the top of the skull forces the head to grow long and narrow. Sagittal craniosynostosis results in a head shape called scaphocephaly and is the most common type of craniosynostosis.
Coronal. Premature fusion of one of the coronal sutures (unicoronal) that run from each ear to the top of the skull may cause the forehead to flatten on the affected side and bulge on the unaffected side. It also leads to turning of the nose and a raised eye socket on the affected side. When both coronal sutures fuse prematurely (bicoronal), the head has a short and wide appearance, often with the forehead tilted forward.
Metopic. The metopic suture runs from the top of the bridge of the nose up through the midline of the forehead to the anterior fontanel and the sagittal suture. Premature fusion gives the forehead a triangular appearance and widens the back part of the head. This is also called trigonocephaly.
Lambdoid. Lambdoid synostosis is a rare type of craniosynostosis that involves the lambdoid suture, which runs along the back of the head. It may cause one side of your baby's head to appear flat, one ear to be higher than the other ear and tilting of the top of the head to one side.
A misshapen head doesn't always indicate craniosynostosis. For example, if the back of your baby's head appears flattened, it could be the result of spending too much time on one side of his or her head. This can be treated with regular position changes, or if significant, with helmet therapy (cranial orthosis) to help reshape the head to a more normal appearance.
Your doctor will routinely monitor your child's head growth at well-child visits. Talk to your pediatrician if you have concerns about your baby's head growth or shape.
Often the cause of craniosynostosis is not known, but sometimes it's related to genetic disorders.
Nonsyndromic craniosynostosis is the most common type of craniosynostosis, and its cause is unknown, although it's thought to be a combination of genes and environmental factors.
Syndromic craniosynostosis is caused by certain genetic syndromes, such as Apert syndrome, Pfeiffer syndrome or Crouzon syndrome, which can affect your baby's skull development. These syndromes usually also include other physical features and health problems.
If untreated, craniosynostosis may cause, for example: Permanent head and facial deformity, Poor self-esteem and social isolation.
The risk of increased pressure inside the skull (intracranial pressure) from simple craniosynostosis is small, as long as the suture and head shape are fixed surgically. But babies with an underlying syndrome may develop increased intracranial pressure if their skulls don't expand enough to make room for their growing brains.
If untreated, increased intracranial pressure can cause: Developmental delays, Cognitive impairment, No energy or interest (lethargy), Blindness, Eye movement disorders, Seizures, Death, in rare instances.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is marked by rapid mental deterioration, usually within a few months. Initial signs and symptoms typically include: Personality changes, Anxiety, Depression, Memory loss, Impaired thinking, Blurred vision or blindness, Insomnia, Difficulty speaking, Difficulty swallowing, Sudden, jerky movements.
As the disease progresses, mental symptoms worsen. Most people eventually lapse into a coma. Heart failure, respiratory failure, pneumonia or other infections are generally the cause of death. Death usually occurs within a year.
In people with the rarer vCJD, psychiatric symptoms may be more prominent in the beginning, with dementia — the loss of the ability to think, reason and remember — developing later in the illness. In addition, this variant affects people at a younger age than classic CJD does and appears to have a slightly longer duration — 12 to 14 months.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and its variants belong to a broad group of human and animal diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs). The name derives from the spongy holes, visible under a microscope, that develop in affected brain tissue.
The cause of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and other TSEs appears to be abnormal versions of a kind of protein called a prion. Normally these proteins are harmless. But when they're misshapen, they become infectious and can harm normal biological processes.
The risk of CJD is low. The disease can't be transmitted through coughing or sneezing, touching, or sexual contact. The three ways it develops are:
Sporadically. Most people with classic CJD develop the disease for no apparent reason. Termed spontaneous CJD or sporadic CJD, this type accounts for the majority of cases.
By inheritance. Fewer than 15 percent of people with CJD have a family history of the disease or test positive for a genetic mutation associated with CJD.  This type is referred to as familial CJD.
By contamination. A small number of people have developed CJD after being exposed to infected human tissue during a medical procedure, such as a cornea or skin transplant. Also, because standard sterilization methods do not destroy abnormal prions, a few people have developed CJD after undergoing brain surgery with contaminated instruments.
Cases of CJD related to medical procedures are referred to as iatrogenic CJD. Variant CJD is linked primarily to eating beef infected with mad cow disease (bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE).
Most cases of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease occur for unknown reasons, and no risk factors can be identified. However, a few factors seem to be associated with different kinds of CJD.
Age. Sporadic CJD tends to develop later in life, usually around age 60. Onset of familial CJD occurs slightly earlier and vCJD has affected people at a much younger age, usually in their late 20s.
Genetics. People with familial CJD have a genetic mutation that causes the disease. The disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, which means you need to inherit only one copy of the mutated gene, from either parent, to develop the disease. If you have the mutation, the chance of passing it on to your children is 50 percent.
Genetic analysis in people with iatrogenic and vCJD suggest that inheriting identical copies of certain variants of the prion gene may increase your risk of developing CJD if you're exposed to contaminated tissue.
Exposure to contaminated tissue. People who've received human growth hormone derived from human pituitary glands or who've had grafts of tissue that covers the brain (dura mater) may be at risk of iatrogenic CJD.
The risk of contracting vCJD from eating contaminated beef is difficult to determine. In general, if countries are effectively implementing public health measures, the risk is virtually nonexistent.
As with other causes of dementia, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease profoundly affects the brain as well as the body, although CJD and its variants usually progress much more rapidly. People with CJD usually withdraw from friends and family and eventually lose the ability to recognize or relate to them. They also lose the ability to care for themselves and many eventually slip into a coma. The disease ultimately is fatal.
In Crohn's disease, any part of your small or large intestine can be involved, and it may be continuous or may involve multiple segments. In some people, the disease is confined to the colon, which is part of the large intestine.
Signs and symptoms of Crohn's disease can range from mild to severe. They usually develop gradually, but sometimes will come on suddenly, without warning. You may also have periods of time when you have no signs or symptoms (remission).
When the disease is active, signs and symptoms may include: Diarrhea, Fever, Fatigue, Abdominal pain and cramping, Blood in your stool, Mouth sores, Reduced appetite and weight loss, Pain or drainage near or around the anus due to inflammation from a tunnel into the skin (fistula).
People with severe Crohn's disease may also experience: Inflammation of skin, eyes and joints, Inflammation of the liver or bile ducts, Kidney stones, Iron deficiency (anemia), Delayed growth or sexual development, in children.
See your doctor if you have persistent changes in your bowel habits or if you have any of the signs and symptoms of Crohn's disease, such as: Abdominal pain, Blood in your stool, Nausea and vomiting, Ongoing bouts of diarrhea that don't respond to over-the-counter (OTC) medications, Unexplained fever lasting more than a day or two, Unexplained weight loss.
The exact cause of Crohn's disease remains unknown. Previously, diet and stress were suspected, but now doctors know that these factors may aggravate, but don't cause, Crohn's disease. Several factors, such as heredity and a malfunctioning immune system, likely play a role in its development.
Immune system. It's possible that a virus or bacterium may trigger Crohn's disease; however, scientists have yet to identify such a trigger. When your immune system tries to fight off the invading microorganism, an abnormal immune response causes the immune system to attack the cells in the digestive tract, too.
Heredity. Crohn's is more common in people who have family members with the disease, so genes may play a role in making people more susceptible. However, most people with Crohn's disease don't have a family history of the disease.
Risk factors for Crohn's disease may include:
Age. Crohn's disease can occur at any age, but you're likely to develop the condition when you're young. Most people who develop Crohn's disease are diagnosed before they're around 30 years old.
Ethnicity. Although Crohn's disease can affect any ethnic group, whites have the highest risk, especially people of Eastern European (Ashkenazi) Jewish descent. However, the incidence of Crohn's disease is increasing among Black people who live in North America and the United Kingdom.
Family history. You're at higher risk if you have a first-degree relative, such as a parent, sibling or child, with the disease. As many as 1 in 5 people with Crohn's disease has a family member with the disease.
Cigarette smoking. Cigarette smoking is the most important controllable risk factor for developing Crohn's disease. Smoking also leads to more-severe disease and a greater risk of having surgery. If you smoke, it's important to stop.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications. These include ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen sodium (Aleve), diclofenac sodium and others. While they do not cause Crohn's disease, they can lead to inflammation of the bowel that makes Crohn's disease worse.
Crohn's disease may lead to one or more of the following complications:
Bowel obstruction. Crohn's disease can affect the entire thickness of the intestinal wall. Over time, parts of the bowel can scar and narrow, which may block the flow of digestive contents. You may require surgery to remove the diseased portion of your bowel.
Ulcers. Chronic inflammation can lead to open sores (ulcers) anywhere in your digestive tract, including your mouth and anus, and in the genital area (perineum).
Fistulas. Sometimes ulcers can extend completely through the intestinal wall, creating a fistula — an abnormal connection between different body parts. Fistulas can develop between your intestine and your skin, or between your intestine and another organ. Fistulas near or around the anal area (perianal) are the most common kind.
When fistulas develop in the abdomen, food may bypass areas of the bowel that are necessary for absorption. Fistulas may form between loops of bowel, in the bladder or vagina, or through the skin, causing continuous drainage of bowel contents to your skin.
In some cases, a fistula may become infected and form an abscess, which can be life-threatening if not treated.
Anal fissure. This is a small tear in the tissue that lines the anus or in the skin around the anus where infections can occur. It's often associated with painful bowel movements and may lead to a perianal fistula.
Malnutrition. Diarrhea, abdominal pain and cramping may make it difficult for you to eat or for your intestine to absorb enough nutrients to keep you nourished. It's also common to develop anemia due to low iron or vitamin B-12 caused by the disease.
Colon cancer. Having Crohn's disease that affects your colon increases your risk of colon cancer. General colon cancer screening guidelines for people without Crohn's disease call for a colonoscopy every 10 years beginning at age 50. Ask your doctor whether you need to have this test done sooner and more frequently.
Other health problems. Crohn's disease can cause problems in other parts of the body. Among these problems are anemia, skin disorders, osteoporosis, arthritis, and gallbladder or liver disease.
Medication risks. Certain Crohn's disease drugs that act by blocking functions of the immune system are associated with a small risk of developing cancers such as lymphoma and skin cancers. They also increase risk of infection.
Corticosteroids can be associated with a risk of osteoporosis, bone fractures, cataracts, glaucoma, diabetes and high blood pressure, among other conditions. Work with your doctor to determine risks and benefits of medications.
Blood clots. Crohn's disease increases the risk of blood clots in veins and arteries.
Croup often begins as a typical cold. If there's enough inflammation and coughing, a child will develop: Loud barking cough that's further aggravated by crying and coughing, as well as anxiety and agitation, setting up a cycle of worsening signs and symptoms, Fever, Hoarse voice, Breathing that may be noisy or labored.
Symptoms of croup are typically worse at night and usually last for three to five days.
If your child's symptoms are severe, worsen or last longer than three to five days or aren't responding to home treatment, contact your child's doctor.
Seek immediate medical attention if your child: Makes noisy, high-pitched breathing sounds both when inhaling and exhaling, Makes high-pitched breathing sounds when not crying or agitated, Begins drooling or has difficulty swallowing, Seems anxious and agitated or fatigued and listless, Breathes at a faster rate than usual, Struggles to breathe, Develops blue or grayish skin around the nose, mouth or fingernails (cyanosis).
Croup is usually caused by a viral infection, most often a parainfluenza virus.
Your child may contract a virus by breathing infected respiratory droplets coughed or sneezed into the air. Virus particles in these droplets may also survive on toys and other surfaces. If your child touches a contaminated surface and then touches his or her eyes, nose or mouth, an infection may follow.
Most at risk of getting croup are children between 6 months and 3 years of age. Because children have small airways, they are most susceptible to having more symptoms with croup.
Most cases of croup are mild. In a small percentage of children, the airway swells enough to interfere with breathing. Rarely, a secondary bacterial infection of the trachea can occur, resulting in trouble breathing and requiring emergency medical care.
Only a small number of children seen in the emergency room for croup require hospitalization.
Symptoms usually come and go, and may include:
Skin lesions. Most people with cryoglobulinemia develop purplish skin lesions on their legs. In some people, leg ulcers also occur.
Joint pain. Symptoms resembling rheumatoid arthritis are common in cryoglobulinemia.
Peripheral neuropathy. Cryoglobulinemia can damage the nerves at the tips of your fingers and toes, causing numbness and other problems.
Cryoglobulinemia has been associated with:
Infections. Hepatitis C is the most common infection associated with cryoglobulinemia. Others include hepatitis B, HIV, Epstein-Barr, toxoplasmosis and malaria.
Certain cancers. Some cancers of the blood, such as multiple myeloma, Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, can sometimes cause cryoglobulinemia.
Autoimmune disorders. Disease such as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis and Sjogren's syndrome increase the risk of developing cryoglobulinemia.
Risk factors of cryoglobulinemia may include:
Your sex. Cryoglobulinemia occurs more frequently in women than in men.
Age. Symptoms of cryoglobulinemia usually begin in middle age.
Other diseases. Cryoglobulinemia is associated with diseases such as hepatitis C, HIV, multiple myeloma, Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, lupus and Sjogren's syndrome.
The first signs and symptoms of cryptosporidium infection, which usually appear within a week after infection, might include: Watery diarrhea, Dehydration, Lack of appetite, Weight loss, Stomach cramps or pain, Fever, Nausea, Vomiting.
Symptoms can last for up to two weeks, though they might come and go for up to a month, even in people with healthy immune systems. Some people with cryptosporidium infection have no symptoms.
Seek medical attention if you develop watery diarrhea that does not get better within a few days.
Cryptosporidium infection begins when the one-celled cryptosporidium parasites get into your body through your mouth. Some strains of cryptosporidium can cause more serious disease.
These parasites then travel to your intestinal tract, where they settle into the walls of your intestines. Eventually, more cells are produced and are shed in massive quantities into your feces, where they are highly contagious.
You can become infected with cryptosporidia by touching anything that has come in contact with contaminated feces. You can get infected by: Drinking contaminated water that contains cryptosporidium parasites, Swimming in contaminated water that contains cryptosporidium parasites and accidentally swallowing some of it, Eating uncooked, contaminated food that contains cryptosporidia, Touching your hand to your mouth if your hand has been in contact with a contaminated surface, object, person or animal.
If you have a compromised immune system from HIV/AIDS, you're more susceptible to illness from cryptosporidium parasites than is a person with a healthy immune system. People with HIV/AIDS can develop severe symptoms and a chronic, persistent form of disease that can be difficult to treat.
Cryptosporidium parasites are one of the more common causes of infectious diarrhea in humans. This parasite is difficult to to get rid of because it's resistant to many disinfectants and many filters don't remove it.
Cryptosporidia can survive for months at varying temperatures, though the parasite can be destroyed by boiling.
People who are at increased risk of developing cryptosporidiosis include: Children, particularly those wearing diapers, who attend child care centers, Parents of infected children, Child care workers, Animal handlers, Those who engage in oral-to-anal sexual activity, International travelers, especially those traveling to developing countries, Backpackers, hikers and campers who drink untreated, unfiltered water, Swimmers who swallow water in pools, lakes and rivers, People who drink water from shallow, unprotected wells.
Complications of cryptosporidium infection include: Malnutrition resulting from poor absorption of nutrients from your intestinal tract, Severe dehydration, Significant weight loss, Inflammation of the passage between your liver, gallbladder and small intestine (bile duct), Inflammation of your gallbladder, liver or pancreas.
Cryptosporidium infection isn't life-threatening. However, if you've had a transplant or if you have a weakened immune system, developing complications can be dangerous.
The signs and symptoms of Cushing syndrome can vary depending on the levels of excess cortisol. Weight gain and fatty tissue deposits, particularly around the midsection and upper back, in the face (moon face), and between the shoulders (buffalo hump), Pink or purple stretch marks (striae) on the skin of the abdomen, thighs, breasts and arms, Thinning, fragile skin that bruises easily, Slow healing of cuts, insect bites and infections, Acne.
Thicker or more visible body and facial hair (hirsutism), Irregular or absent menstrual periods.
Decreased libido, Decreased fertility, Erectile dysfunction.
Severe fatigue, Muscle weakness, Depression, anxiety and irritability, Loss of emotional control, Cognitive difficulties, New or worsened high blood pressure, Headache, Increased pigmentation of the skin, Bone loss, leading to fractures over time, In children, impaired growth.
Contact your doctor if you have symptoms that suggest Cushing syndrome, especially if you're taking corticosteroid medication to treat a condition, such as asthma, arthritis or inflammatory bowel disease.
Excess levels of the hormone cortisol are responsible for Cushing syndrome. Cortisol, which is produced in the adrenal glands, plays a variety of roles in your body.
For example, cortisol helps regulate your blood pressure, reduces inflammation, and keeps your heart and blood vessels functioning normally. Cortisol helps your body respond to stress. It also regulates the way you convert (metabolize) proteins, carbohydrates and fats in your diet into usable energy.
However, when the level of cortisol is too high in your body, you may develop Cushing syndrome.
Cushing syndrome can develop from a cause outside of your body (exogenous Cushing syndrome). One example is taking oral corticosteroid medications in high doses over an extended period of time. These medications, such as prednisone, have the same effect in the body as does cortisol produced by your body.
Oral corticosteroids may be necessary to treat inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus and asthma. It may also be used to prevent your body from rejecting a transplanted organ. Because the doses required to treat these conditions are often higher than the amount of cortisol your body normally needs each day, side effects from excess cortisol can occur.
It's also possible to develop Cushing syndrome from injectable corticosteroids — for example, repeated injections for joint pain, bursitis and back pain. Inhaled steroid medicines (taken for asthma) and steroid skin creams (used for skin disorders such as eczema) are generally less likely to cause Cushing syndrome than are oral corticosteroids. But, in some individuals, these medications may cause Cushing syndrome, especially if taken in high doses.
The condition may also be due to your body's own overproduction of cortisol (endogenous Cushing syndrome). This may occur from excess production by one or both adrenal glands, or overproduction of the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which normally regulates cortisol production.
A pituitary gland tumor (pituitary adenoma). A noncancerous (benign) tumor of the pituitary gland, located at the base of the brain, produces an excess amount of ACTH, which in turn stimulates the adrenal glands to make more cortisol. When this form of the syndrome develops, it's called Cushing disease. It occurs much more often in women and is the most common form of endogenous Cushing syndrome.
An ACTH-secreting tumor. Rarely, a tumor that develops in an organ that normally does not produce ACTH will begin to secrete this hormone in excess, resulting in Cushing syndrome. These tumors, which can be noncancerous (benign) or cancerous (malignant), are usually found in the lungs, pancreas, thyroid or thymus gland.
A primary adrenal gland disease. In some people, the cause of Cushing syndrome is excess cortisol secretion that doesn't depend on stimulation from ACTH and is associated with disorders of the adrenal glands. The most common of these disorders is a noncancerous tumor of the adrenal cortex, called an adrenal adenoma.
Cancerous tumors of the adrenal cortex (adrenocortical carcinomas) are rare, but they can cause Cushing syndrome as well. Occasionally, benign, nodular enlargement of both adrenal glands can result in Cushing syndrome.
Familial Cushing syndrome. Rarely, people inherit a tendency to develop tumors on one or more of their endocrine glands, affecting cortisol levels and causing Cushing syndrome.
Without treatment, complications of Cushing syndrome may include: Bone loss (osteoporosis), which can result in unusual bone fractures, such as rib fractures and fractures of the bones in the feet, High blood pressure (hypertension), Type 2 diabetes, Frequent or unusual infections, Loss of muscle mass and strength.
Signs and symptoms of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma include: Round patches of skin that may be raised or scaly and might be itchy, Patches of skin that appear lighter in color than surrounding skin, Lumps that form on the skin and may break open, Enlarged lymph nodes, Hair loss, Thickening of the skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet, A rash-like skin redness over the entire body that is intensely itchy.
The exact cause of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma isn't known.
In general, cancer begins when cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains instructions that tell a cell what to do. The DNA mutations tell the cells to grow and multiply rapidly, creating many abnormal cells.
In cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, the mutations cause too many abnormal T cells that attack the skin. T cells are part of your immune system, and they normally help your body fight germs. Doctors don't know why the cells attack the skin.
The symptoms of cyclic vomiting syndrome often begin in the morning. Signs and symptoms include: Three or more recurrent episodes of vomiting that start around the same time and last for a similar length of time, Varying intervals of generally normal health without nausea between episodes, Intense nausea and sweating before an episode starts.
Other signs and symptoms during a vomiting episode may include: Abdominal pain, Diarrhea, Dizziness, Sensitivity to light, Headache, Retching or gagging.
Call your doctor if you see blood in your or your child's vomit.
Continued vomiting may cause severe dehydration that can be life-threatening. Call your doctor if you or your child is showing symptoms of dehydration, such as: Excess thirst or dry mouth, Less urination, Dry skin, Sunken eyes or cheeks, No tears when crying, Exhaustion and listlessness.
The underlying cause of cyclic vomiting syndrome is unknown. Some possible causes include genes, digestive difficulties, nervous system problems and hormone imbalances. Specific bouts of vomiting may be triggered by: Colds, allergies or sinus problems, Emotional stress or excitement, especially in children, Anxiety or panic attacks, especially in adults, Certain foods and drinks, such as alcohol, caffeine, chocolate or cheese, Overeating, eating right before going to bed or fasting, Hot weather, Physical exhaustion, Exercising too much, Menstruation, Motion sickness.
Identifying the triggers for vomiting episodes may help with managing cyclic vomiting syndrome.
The relationship between migraines and cyclic vomiting syndrome isn't clear. But many children with cyclic vomiting syndrome have a family history of migraines or have migraines themselves when they get older. In adults, the association between cyclic vomiting syndrome and migraine may be lower.
Chronic use of marijuana (Cannabis sativa) also has been associated with cyclic vomiting syndrome because some people use marijuana to relieve their nausea. However, chronic marijuana use can lead to a condition called cannabis hyperemesis syndrome, which typically leads to persistent vomiting without normal intervening periods. People with this syndrome often demonstrate frequent showering or bathing behavior.
Cannabis hyperemesis syndrome can be confused with cyclic vomiting syndrome. To rule out cannabis hyperemesis syndrome, you need to stop using marijuana for at least one to two weeks to see if vomiting lessens. If it doesn't, your doctor will continue testing for cyclic vomiting syndrome.
Cyclic vomiting syndrome can cause these complications:
Dehydration. Excessive vomiting causes the body to lose water quickly. Severe cases of dehydration may need to be treated in the hospital.
Injury to the food tube. The stomach acid that comes up with the vomit can damage the tube that connects the mouth and stomach (esophagus). Sometimes the esophagus becomes so irritated it bleeds.
Tooth decay. The acid in vomit can corrode tooth enamel.
Some people infected with the microscopic parasite that causes cyclospora infection develop no signs or symptoms. For others, signs and symptoms — which usually begin within two to 11 days of eating contaminated food or drinking contaminated water — may include: Frequent, watery diarrhea, Bouts of diarrhea alternating with bouts of constipation, Loss of appetite and weight loss, Bloating, flatulence and burping, Stomach cramps, Nausea and vomiting, Muscle aches, Fever, Fatigue — this symptom may last long after the active infection has gotten better, General feeling of unwellness (malaise).
The diarrhea may end by itself within a few days, or it may last for weeks. If you have HIV or another condition that compromises your immune system, the infection can last for months if not treated.
Many conditions can cause diarrhea and other gastrointestinal signs and symptoms. If you develop persistent diarrhea that lasts several days or recurs, contact your doctor so that he or she can identify the cause and recommend treatment. If you've eaten a food that's been recalled because of a cyclospora outbreak or traveled in an area where parasites such as cyclospora are common, be sure to tell your doctor.
If you experience dehydration due to diarrhea, see your doctor. Warning signs of dehydration include: Sunken eyes, Dry mouth and tongue, Reduced production of tears, Decreased urine output.
A one-celled parasite, Cyclospora cayetanensis, causes cyclospora infection. You get it by drinking water or eating food that's been contaminated by a person infected with the parasite.
A person infected with cyclospora passes the parasite in stool. However, unlike some other foodborne parasites, cyclospora doesn't become infectious until days or weeks after it's passed in a bowel movement. So it's unlikely that you can get the infection directly from a person infected with cyclospora, such as a restaurant worker who doesn't wash his or her hands adequately after using the toilet.
Before the 1990s, sporadic cases of cyclospora infection turned up only in people who traveled in developing countries and in those with HIV or another condition that caused a weakened immune system. However, since the 1990s, lettuce, fresh basil and imported raspberries have been implicated in cyclospora outbreaks in the United States and Canada.
In the past, people who traveled in developing countries were more likely to get cyclospora infection. These days, the infection is found worldwide, and anyone who ingests contaminated food or water can get it.
The prolonged diarrhea of untreated cyclospora infection can cause dehydration. If you're an otherwise healthy adult, you can treat dehydration by drinking more fluids. Some people may need to be hospitalized to receive intravenous fluids because they're at higher risk of severe dehydration. Examples include: People with other serious illnesses, Infants and young children, Older adults.
Cyclothymia symptoms alternate between emotional highs and lows. The highs of cyclothymia include symptoms of an elevated mood (hypomanic symptoms). The lows consist of mild or moderate depressive symptoms.
Cyclothymia symptoms are similar to those of bipolar I or II disorder, but they're less severe. When you have cyclothymia, you can typically function in your daily life, though not always well. The unpredictable nature of your mood shifts may significantly disrupt your life because you never know how you're going to feel.
Signs and symptoms of the highs of cyclothymia may include: An exaggerated feeling of happiness or well-being (euphoria), Extreme optimism, Inflated self-esteem, Talking more than usual, Poor judgment that can result in risky behavior or unwise choices, Racing thoughts, Irritable or agitated behavior, Excessive physical activity, Increased drive to perform or achieve goals (sexual, work related or social), Decreased need for sleep, Tendency to be easily distracted, Inability to concentrate.
Signs and symptoms of the lows of cyclothymia may include: Feeling sad, hopeless or empty, Tearfulness, Irritability, especially in children and teenagers, Loss of interest in activities once considered enjoyable, Changes in weight, Feelings of worthlessness or guilt, Sleep problems, Restlessness, Fatigue or feeling slowed down, Problems concentrating, Thinking of death or suicide.
If you have any symptoms of cyclothymia, seek medical help as soon as possible. Cyclothymia generally doesn't get better on its own. If you're reluctant to seek treatment, work up the courage to confide in someone who can help you take that first step.
If a loved one has symptoms of cyclothymia, talk openly and honestly with that person about your concerns. You can't force someone to seek professional help, but you can offer support and help find a qualified doctor or mental health provider.
Although suicidal thoughts might occur with cyclothymia, they're more likely to occur if you have bipolar I or II disorder. If you're considering suicide right now:
Call 911 or your local emergency services number, or go to a hospital emergency department.
Call a local crisis center or suicide hotline number — in the United States, you can call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) to reach a trained counselor. Use that same number and press "1" to reach the Veterans Crisis Line.
If you just can't make that call, reach out to someone else — immediately — such as your doctor, mental health provider, family member, friend or someone in your faith community.
It's not known specifically what causes cyclothymia. As with many mental health disorders, research shows that it may result from a combination of: Heredity, as cyclothymia tends to run in families, Differences in the way the brain works, such as changes in the brain's neurobiology, Environment, such as traumatic experiences or prolonged periods of stress.
Cyclothymia is thought to be relatively rare. But true estimates are hard to pin down because people may be undiagnosed or misdiagnosed as having other mood disorders, such as depression.
Cyclothymia typically starts during the teenage years or young adulthood. It affects about the same number of males and females.
If you have cyclothymia: Not treating it can result in significant emotional problems that affect every area of your life, There is a high risk of later developing bipolar I or II disorder, Substance misuse is common, You may also have an anxiety disorder, You may be at increased risk of suicidal thoughts and suicide.
In the U.S., because of newborn screening, cystic fibrosis can be diagnosed within the first month of life, before symptoms develop. But people born before newborn screening became available may not be diagnosed until the signs and symptoms of CF show up.
Cystic fibrosis signs and symptoms vary, depending on the severity of the disease. Even in the same person, symptoms may worsen or improve as time passes. Some people may not experience symptoms until their teenage years or adulthood. People who are not diagnosed until adulthood usually have milder disease and are more likely to have atypical symptoms, such as recurring bouts of an inflamed pancreas (pancreatitis), infertility and recurring pneumonia.
People with cystic fibrosis have a higher than normal level of salt in their sweat. Parents often can taste the salt when they kiss their children. Most of the other signs and symptoms of CF affect the respiratory system and digestive system.
The thick and sticky mucus associated with cystic fibrosis clogs the tubes that carry air in and out of your lungs. This can cause signs and symptoms such as: A persistent cough that produces thick mucus (sputum), Wheezing, Exercise intolerance, Repeated lung infections, Inflamed nasal passages or a stuffy nose, Recurrent sinusitis.
The thick mucus can also block tubes that carry digestive enzymes from your pancreas to your small intestine. Without these digestive enzymes, your intestines aren't able to completely absorb the nutrients in the food you eat. The result is often: Foul-smelling, greasy stools, Poor weight gain and growth, Intestinal blockage, particularly in newborns (meconium ileus), Chronic or severe constipation, which may include frequent straining while trying to pass stool, eventually causing part of the rectum to protrude outside the anus (rectal prolapse).
If you or your child has symptoms of cystic fibrosis — or if someone in your family has CF — talk with your doctor about testing for the disease. Consult a physician who is knowledgeable about CF.
Cystic fibrosis requires consistent, regular follow-up with your doctor, at least every three months. Contact you doctor if you experience new or worsening symptoms, such as more mucus than usual or a change in the mucus color, lack of energy, weight loss, or severe constipation.
Seek immediate medical care if you're coughing up blood, have chest pain or difficulty breathing, or have severe stomach pain and distention.
In cystic fibrosis, a defect (mutation) in a gene — the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene — changes a protein that regulates the movement of salt in and out of cells. The result is thick, sticky mucus in the respiratory, digestive and reproductive systems, as well as increased salt in sweat.
Many different defects can occur in the gene. The type of gene mutation is associated with the severity of the condition.
Children need to inherit one copy of the gene from each parent in order to have the disease. If children inherit only one copy, they won't develop cystic fibrosis. However, they will be carriers and could pass the gene to their own children.
Because cystic fibrosis is an inherited disorder, it runs in families, so family history is a risk factor. Although CF occurs in all races, it's most common in white people of Northern European ancestry.
Complications of cystic fibrosis can affect the respiratory, digestive and reproductive systems, as well as other organs.
Damaged airways (bronchiectasis). Cystic fibrosis is one of the leading causes of bronchiectasis, a chronic lung condition with abnormal widening and scarring of the airways (bronchial tubes). This makes it harder to move air in and out of the lungs and clear mucus from the bronchial tubes.
Chronic infections. Thick mucus in the lungs and sinuses provides an ideal breeding ground for bacteria and fungi. People with cystic fibrosis may often have sinus infections, bronchitis or pneumonia. Infection with bacteria that is resistant to antibiotics and difficult to treat is common.
Growths in the nose (nasal polyps). Because the lining inside the nose is inflamed and swollen, it can develop soft, fleshy growths (polyps).
Coughing up blood (hemoptysis). Bronchiectasis can occur next to blood vessels in the lungs. The combination of airway damage and infection can result in coughing up blood. Often this is only a small amount of blood, but it can also be life-threatening.
Pneumothorax. In this condition, air leaks into the space that separates the lungs from the chest wall, and part or all of a lung collapses. This is more common in adults with cystic fibrosis. Pneumothorax can cause sudden chest pain and breathlessness. People often feel a bubbling sensation in the chest.
Respiratory failure. Over time, cystic fibrosis can damage lung tissue so badly that it no longer works. Lung function usually worsens gradually, and it eventually can become life-threatening. Respiratory failure is the most common cause of death.
Acute exacerbations. People with cystic fibrosis may experience worsening of their respiratory symptoms, such as coughing with more mucus and shortness of breath. This is called an acute exacerbation and requires treatment with antibiotics. Sometimes treatment can be provided at home, but hospitalization may be needed. Decreased energy and weight loss also are common during exacerbations.
Nutritional deficiencies. Thick mucus can block the tubes that carry digestive enzymes from your pancreas to your intestines. Without these enzymes, your body can't absorb protein, fats or fat-soluble vitamins, so you can't get enough nutrients. This can result in delayed growth, weight loss or inflammation of the pancreas.
Diabetes. The pancreas produces insulin, which your body needs to use sugar. Cystic fibrosis increases the risk of diabetes. About 20% of teenagers and 40% to 50% of adults with CF develop diabetes.
Liver disease. The tube that carries bile from your liver and gallbladder to your small intestine may become blocked and inflamed. This can lead to liver problems, such as jaundice, fatty liver disease and cirrhosis — and sometimes gallstones.
Intestinal obstruction. Intestinal blockage can happen to people with cystic fibrosis at all ages. Intussusception, a condition in which a segment of the intestine slides inside an adjacent section of the intestine like a collapsible telescope, also can occur.
Distal intestinal obstruction syndrome (DIOS). DIOS is partial or complete obstruction where the small intestine meets the large intestine. DIOS requires urgent treatment.
Infertility in men. Almost all men with cystic fibrosis are infertile because the tube that connects the testes and prostate gland (vas deferens) is either blocked with mucus or missing entirely. Certain fertility treatments and surgical procedures sometimes make it possible for men with CF to become biological fathers.
Reduced fertility in women. Although women with cystic fibrosis may be less fertile than other women, it's possible for them to conceive and to have successful pregnancies. Still, pregnancy can worsen the signs and symptoms of CF, so be sure to discuss the possible risks with your doctor.
Thinning of the bones (osteoporosis). People with cystic fibrosis are at higher risk of developing a dangerous thinning of bones. They may also experience joint pain, arthritis and muscle pain.
Electrolyte imbalances and dehydration. Because people with cystic fibrosis have saltier sweat, the balance of minerals in their blood may be upset. This makes them prone to dehydration, especially with exercise or in hot weather. Signs and symptoms include increased heart rate, fatigue, weakness and low blood pressure.
Mental health problems. Dealing with a chronic illness that has no cure may cause fear, depression and anxiety.
Cystitis signs and symptoms often include: A strong, persistent urge to urinate, A burning sensation when urinating, Passing frequent, small amounts of urine, Blood in the urine (hematuria), Passing cloudy or strong-smelling urine, Pelvic discomfort, A feeling of pressure in the lower abdomen, Low-grade fever.
In young children, new episodes of accidental daytime wetting also may be a sign of a urinary tract infection (UTI). Nighttime bed-wetting on its own isn't likely to be associated with a UTI.
Seek immediate medical help if you have signs and symptoms common to a kidney infection, including: Back or side pain, Fever and chills, Nausea and vomiting.
If you develop urgent, frequent or painful urination that lasts for several hours or longer or if you notice blood in your urine, call your doctor. If you've been diagnosed with a UTI in the past and you develop symptoms that mimic a previous UTI, call your doctor.
Also call your doctor if cystitis symptoms return after you've finished a course of antibiotics. You may need a different type of medication.
If your child starts having daytime wetting accidents, call your pediatrician.
In otherwise healthy men, cystitis is rare and should be investigated by your doctor.
Your urinary system includes your kidneys, ureters, bladder and urethra. All play a role in removing waste from your body. Your kidneys — a pair of bean-shaped organs located toward the back of your upper abdomen — filter waste from your blood and regulate the concentrations of many substances. Tubes called ureters carry urine from your kidneys to the bladder, where it's stored until it exits your body through the urethra.
UTIs typically occur when bacteria outside the body enter the urinary tract through the urethra and begin to multiply. Most cases of cystitis are caused by a type of Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria.
Bacterial bladder infections may occur in women as a result of sexual intercourse. But even sexually inactive girls and women are susceptible to lower urinary tract infections because the female genital area often harbors bacteria that can cause cystitis.
Although bacterial infections are the most common cause of cystitis, a number of noninfectious factors also may cause the bladder to become inflamed. Some examples include:
Interstitial cystitis. The cause of this chronic bladder inflammation, also called painful bladder syndrome, is unclear. Most cases are diagnosed in women. The condition can be difficult to diagnose and treat.
Drug-induced cystitis. Certain medications, particularly the chemotherapy drugs cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide, can cause inflammation of your bladder as the broken-down components of the drugs exit your body.
Radiation cystitis. Radiation treatment of the pelvic area can cause inflammatory changes in bladder tissue.
Foreign-body cystitis. Long-term use of a catheter can predispose you to bacterial infections and to tissue damage, both of which can cause inflammation.
Chemical cystitis. Some people may be hypersensitive to chemicals contained in certain products, such as bubble bath, feminine hygiene sprays or spermicidal jellies, and may develop an allergic-type reaction within the bladder, causing inflammation.
Cystitis associated with other conditions. Cystitis may sometimes occur as a complication of other disorders, such as diabetes, kidney stones, an enlarged prostate or spinal cord injuries.
Some people are more likely than others to develop bladder infections or recurrent urinary tract infections. Women are one such group. A key reason is physical anatomy. Women have a shorter urethra, which cuts down on the distance bacteria must travel to reach the bladder.
Women at greatest risk of UTIs include those who:
Are sexually active. Sexual intercourse can result in bacteria being pushed into the urethra.
Use certain types of birth control. Women who use diaphragms are at increased risk of a UTI. Diaphragms that contain spermicidal agents further increase your risk.
Are pregnant. Hormonal changes during pregnancy may increase the risk of a bladder infection.
Have experienced menopause. Altered hormone levels in postmenopausal women are often associated with UTIs.
Other risk factors in both men and women include:
Interference with the flow of urine. This can occur in conditions such as a stone in the bladder or, in men, an enlarged prostate.
Changes in the immune system. This can happen with certain conditions, such as diabetes, HIV infection and cancer treatment. A depressed immune system increases the risk of bacterial and, in some cases, viral bladder infections.
Prolonged use of bladder catheters. These tubes may be needed in people with chronic illnesses or in older adults. Prolonged use can result in increased vulnerability to bacterial infections as well as bladder tissue damage.
In men without any predisposing health issues, cystitis is rare.
When treated promptly and properly, bladder infections rarely lead to complications. But left untreated, they can become something more serious. Complications may include:
Kidney infection. An untreated bladder infection can lead to kidney infection, also called pyelonephritis (pie-uh-low-nuh-FRY-tis). Kidney infections may permanently damage your kidneys.
Young children and older adults are at the greatest risk of kidney damage from bladder infections because their symptoms are often overlooked or mistaken for other conditions.
Blood in the urine. With cystitis, you may have blood cells in your urine that can be seen only with a microscope (microscopic hematuria) and that usually resolves with treatment. If blood cells remain after treatment, your doctor may recommend a specialist to determine the cause.
Blood in the urine that you can see (gross hematuria) is rare with typical, bacterial cystitis, but this sign is more common with chemotherapy- or radiation-induced cystitis.
Most healthy people who are infected with CMV may experience no symptoms. Some experience minor symptoms. People who are more likely to experience signs and symptoms of CMV include:
Newborns who became infected with CMV before they were born (congenital CMV).
Infants who become infected during birth or shortly afterward (perinatal CMV). This group includes babies infected through breast milk.
People who have weakened immune systems, such as those who have had an organ, bone marrow or stem cell transplant, or those who are infected with HIV.
Most babies who have congenital CMV appear healthy at birth.
A few babies who have congenital CMV who appear healthy at birth develop signs over time — sometimes not for months or years after birth. The most common of these late-occurring signs are hearing loss and developmental delay. A small number of babies may also develop vision problems.
The following signs and symptoms are more common in babies who have congenital CMV and who are sick at birth: Premature birth, Low birth weight, Yellow skin and eyes (jaundice), Enlarged and poorly functioning liver, Purple skin splotches or a rash or both, Abnormally small head (microencephaly), Enlarged spleen, Pneumonia, Seizures.
If your immune system is weakened, you might experience serious problems that affect your: Eyes, Lungs, Liver, Esophagus, Stomach, Intestines, Brain.
Most people who are infected with CMV who are otherwise healthy experience few if any symptoms. When first infected, some adults may have symptoms similar to infectious mononucleosis, including: Fatigue, Fever, Sore throat, Muscle aches.
See your doctor if:
You have a weakened immune system and you're experiencing symptoms of CMV infection. For people who have weakened immune systems, CMV infection can be serious or even fatal. People who have undergone stem cell or organ transplants seem to be at greatest risk.
You develop a mononucleosis-like illness while you're pregnant.
If you have CMV but are otherwise healthy, and you're experiencing any mild, generalized illness, you could be in a reactivation period. Self-care, such as getting plenty of rest, should be enough for your body to control the infection.
If you know you were infected with CMV during your pregnancy, tell your baby's doctor. The doctor will likely assess your baby for hearing or vision problems.
CMV is related to the viruses that cause chickenpox, herpes simplex and mononucleosis. CMV may cycle through periods when it lies dormant and then reactivates. If you're healthy, CMV mainly stays dormant.
When the virus is active in your body, you can pass the virus to other people. The virus is spread through body fluids — including blood, urine, saliva, breast milk, tears, semen and vaginal fluids. Casual contact doesn't transmit CMV.
Ways the virus can be transmitted include:
Touching your eyes or the inside of your nose or mouth after coming into contact with the body fluids of an infected person.
Sexual contact with an infected person.
The breast milk of an infected mother.
Organ, bone marrow or stem cell transplantation or blood transfusions.
Birth. An infected mother can pass the virus to her baby before or during birth. The risk of transmitting the virus to your baby is higher if you become infected for the first time during pregnancy.
CMV is a widespread and common virus that can infect almost anyone.
Complications of CMV infection vary, depending on your overall health and when you were infected.
Rarely, CMV causes a healthy adult to develop mononucleosis. Other rare complications for healthy adults include problems with the digestive system, liver, brain and nervous system.
Complications of CMV infection can include: Vision loss, due to inflammation of the light-sensing layer of the eye (retinitis), Digestive system problems, including inflammation of the colon (colitis), esophagus (esophagitis) and liver (hepatitis), Nervous system problems, including brain inflammation (encephalitis), Pneumonia.
An infant whose mother first became infected with CMV during pregnancy is more likely to experience complications. Complications for the baby can include: Hearing loss, Intellectual disability, Vision problems, Seizures, Lack of coordination, Weakness or problems using muscles.
Dandruff signs and symptoms may include: Skin flakes on your scalp, hair, eyebrows, beard or mustache, and shoulders, Itchy scalp, Scaly, crusty scalp in infants with cradle cap.
The signs and symptoms may be more severe if you're stressed, and they tend to flare in cold, dry seasons.
Most cases of dandruff don't require a doctor's care. See your primary care doctor or a doctor who specializes in skin conditions (dermatologist) if your condition doesn’t improve with regular use of over-the-counter dandruff shampoo.
Dandruff may have several causes, including: Irritated, oily skin, Not shampooing enough, A yeastlike fungus (malassezia) that feeds on oils on the scalps of most adults, Dry skin, Sensitivity to hair care products (contact dermatitis), Other skin conditions, such as psoriasis and eczema.
Almost anyone can have dandruff, but certain factors can make you more susceptible:
Age. Dandruff usually begins in young adulthood and continues through middle age. That doesn't mean older adults don't get dandruff. For some people, the problem can be lifelong.
Being male. Because more men have dandruff, some researchers think male hormones may play a role.
Certain illnesses. Parkinson's disease and other diseases that affect the nervous system also seem to increase risk of dandruff. So does having HIV or a weakened immune system.
Symptoms of de Quervain's tenosynovitis include: Pain near the base of your thumb, Swelling near the base of your thumb, Difficulty moving your thumb and wrist when you're doing something that involves grasping or pinching, A "sticking" or "stop-and-go" sensation in your thumb when moving it.
If the condition goes too long without treatment, the pain may spread further into your thumb, back into your forearm or both. Pinching, grasping and other movements of your thumb and wrist aggravate the pain.
Consult your doctor if you're still having problems with pain or function and you've already tried: Not using your affected thumb, Applying cold to the affected area, Using nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen (Aleve).
Chronic overuse of your wrist is commonly associated with de Quervain's tenosynovitis.
Tendons are rope-like structures that attach muscle to bone. When you grip, grasp, clench, pinch or wring anything in your hand, two tendons in your wrist and lower thumb normally glide smoothly through the small tunnel that connects them to the base of the thumb. Repeating a particular motion day after day may irritate the sheath around the two tendons, causing thickening and swelling that restricts their movement.
Other causes of de Quervain's tenosynovitis include: Direct injury to your wrist or tendon; scar tissue can restrict movement of the tendons, Inflammatory arthritis, such as rheumatoid arthritis.
Risk factors for de Quervain's tenosynovitis include:
Age. If you're between the ages of 30 and 50, you have a higher risk of developing de Quervain's tenosynovitis than do other age groups, including children.
Sex. The condition is more common in women.
Being pregnant. The condition may be associated with pregnancy.
Baby care. Lifting your child repeatedly involves using your thumbs as leverage and may also be associated with the condition.
Jobs or hobbies that involve repetitive hand and wrist motions. These may contribute to de Quervain's tenosynovitis.
Untreated de Quervain's tenosynovitis might make it hard to use your hand and wrist properly and limit your wrist's range of motion.
Deep vein thrombosis signs and symptoms can include:
Swelling in the affected leg. Rarely, there's swelling in both legs.
Pain in your leg. The pain often starts in your calf and can feel like cramping or soreness.
Red or discolored skin on the leg.
A feeling of warmth in the affected leg.
Deep vein thrombosis can occur without noticeable symptoms.
If you develop signs or symptoms of deep vein thrombosis, contact your doctor.
If you develop signs or symptoms of a pulmonary embolism — a life-threatening complication of deep vein thrombosis — seek immediate medical attention. Sudden shortness of breath, Chest pain or discomfort that worsens when you take a deep breath or when you cough, Feeling lightheaded or dizzy, or fainting, Rapid pulse, Coughing up blood.
The blood clots of deep vein thrombosis can be caused by anything that prevents your blood from circulating or clotting normally, such as injury to a vein, surgery, certain medications and limited movement.
Many factors can increase your risk of developing deep vein thrombosis (DVT). The more you have, the greater your risk of DVT. Risk factors include:
Inheriting a blood-clotting disorder. Some people inherit a disorder that makes their blood clot more easily. This condition on its own might not cause blood clots unless combined with one or more other risk factors.
Prolonged bed rest, such as during a long hospital stay, or paralysis. When your legs remain still for long periods, your calf muscles don't contract to help blood circulate, which can increase the risk of blood clots.
Injury or surgery. Injury to your veins or surgery can increase the risk of blood clots.
Pregnancy. Pregnancy increases the pressure in the veins in your pelvis and legs. Women with an inherited clotting disorder are especially at risk. The risk of blood clots from pregnancy can continue for up to six weeks after you have your baby.
Birth control pills (oral contraceptives) or hormone replacement therapy. Both can increase your blood's ability to clot.
Being overweight or obese. Being overweight increases the pressure in the veins in your pelvis and legs.
Smoking. Smoking affects blood clotting and circulation, which can increase your risk of DVT.
Cancer. Some forms of cancer increase substances in your blood that cause your blood to clot. Some forms of cancer treatment also increase the risk of blood clots.
Heart failure. This increases your risk of DVT and pulmonary embolism. Because people with heart failure have limited heart and lung function, the symptoms caused by even a small pulmonary embolism are more noticeable.
Inflammatory bowel disease. Bowel diseases, such as Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis, increase the risk of DVT.
A personal or family history of deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism. If you or someone in your family has had one or both of these, you might be at greater risk of developing a DVT.
Age. Being older than 60 increases your risk of DVT, though it can occur at any age.
Sitting for long periods of time, such as when driving or flying. When your legs remain still for hours, your calf muscles don't contract, which normally helps blood circulate. Blood clots can form in the calves of your legs if your calf muscles don't move for long periods.
A serious complication associated with deep vein thrombosis is pulmonary embolism.
A pulmonary embolism occurs when a blood vessel in your lung becomes blocked by a blood clot (thrombus) that travels to your lung from another part of your body, usually your leg.
A pulmonary embolism can be life-threatening. It's important to watch for signs and symptoms of a pulmonary embolism and seek medical attention if they occur. Signs and symptoms of a pulmonary embolism include: Sudden shortness of breath, Chest pain or discomfort that worsens when you take a deep breath or when you cough, Feeling lightheaded or dizzy, or fainting, Rapid pulse, Coughing up blood.
A common complication that can occur after deep vein thrombosis is known as postphlebitic syndrome, also called postthrombotic syndrome. Damage to your veins from the blood clot reduces blood flow in the affected areas, which can cause: Persistent swelling of your legs (edema), Leg pain, Skin discoloration, Skin sores.
Thirst isn't always a reliable early indicator of the body's need for water. Many people, particularly older adults, don't feel thirsty until they're already dehydrated. That's why it's important to increase water intake during hot weather or when you're ill.
The signs and symptoms of dehydration also may differ by age. Dry mouth and tongue, No tears when crying, No wet diapers for three hours, Sunken eyes, cheeks, Sunken soft spot on top of skull, Listlessness or irritability.
Extreme thirst, Less frequent urination, Dark-colored urine, Fatigue, Dizziness, Confusion.
Call your family doctor if you or a loved one: Has had diarrhea for 24 hours or more, Is irritable or disoriented and much sleepier or less active than usual, Can't keep down fluids, Has bloody or black stool.
Sometimes dehydration occurs for simple reasons: You don't drink enough because you're sick or busy, or because you lack access to safe drinking water when you're traveling, hiking or camping.
Other dehydration causes include:
Diarrhea, vomiting. Severe, acute diarrhea — that is, diarrhea that comes on suddenly and violently — can cause a tremendous loss of water and electrolytes in a short amount of time. If you have vomiting along with diarrhea, you lose even more fluids and minerals.
Fever. In general, the higher your fever, the more dehydrated you may become. The problem worsens if you have a fever in addition to diarrhea and vomiting.
Excessive sweating. You lose water when you sweat. If you do vigorous activity and don't replace fluids as you go along, you can become dehydrated. Hot, humid weather increases the amount you sweat and the amount of fluid you lose.
Increased urination. This may be due to undiagnosed or uncontrolled diabetes. Certain medications, such as diuretics and some blood pressure medications, also can lead to dehydration, generally because they cause you to urinate more.
Anyone can become dehydrated, but certain people are at greater risk:
Infants and children. The most likely group to experience severe diarrhea and vomiting, infants and children are especially vulnerable to dehydration. Having a higher surface area to volume area, they also lose a higher proportion of their fluids from a high fever or burns. Young children often can't tell you that they're thirsty, nor can they get a drink for themselves.
Older adults. As you age, your body's fluid reserve becomes smaller, your ability to conserve water is reduced and your thirst sense becomes less acute. These problems are compounded by chronic illnesses such as diabetes and dementia, and by the use of certain medications. Older adults also may have mobility problems that limit their ability to obtain water for themselves.
People with chronic illnesses. Having uncontrolled or untreated diabetes puts you at high risk of dehydration. Kidney disease also increases your risk, as do medications that increase urination. Even having a cold or sore throat makes you more susceptible to dehydration because you're less likely to feel like eating or drinking when you're sick.
People who work or exercise outside. When it's hot and humid, your risk of dehydration and heat illness increases. That's because when the air is humid, sweat can't evaporate and cool you as quickly as it normally does, and this can lead to an increased body temperature and the need for more fluids.
Dehydration can lead to serious complications, including:
Heat injury. If you don't drink enough fluids when you're exercising vigorously and perspiring heavily, you may end up with a heat injury, ranging in severity from mild heat cramps to heat exhaustion or potentially life-threatening heatstroke.
Urinary and kidney problems. Prolonged or repeated bouts of dehydration can cause urinary tract infections, kidney stones and even kidney failure.
Seizures. Electrolytes — such as potassium and sodium — help carry electrical signals from cell to cell. If your electrolytes are out of balance, the normal electrical messages can become mixed up, which can lead to involuntary muscle contractions and sometimes to a loss of consciousness.
Low blood volume shock (hypovolemic shock). This is one of the most serious, and sometimes life-threatening, complications of dehydration. It occurs when low blood volume causes a drop in blood pressure and a drop in the amount of oxygen in your body.
Some men with delayed ejaculation need 30 minutes or more of sexual stimulation to have an orgasm and ejaculate. Other men might not be able to ejaculate at all (anejaculation).
But, there's no specific time that indicates a diagnosis of delayed ejaculation. Instead, you are probably experiencing delayed ejaculation if the delay is causing distress or frustration, or if you have to stop sexual activity due to fatigue, physical irritation, loss of erection or a request from your partner.
Often, men might have difficulty reaching orgasm during sexual intercourse or other sexual activities with a partner. Some men can ejaculate only when masturbating.
Delayed ejaculation is divided into the following types based on symptoms:
Lifelong vs. acquired. With lifelong delayed ejaculation, the problem is present from the time of sexual maturity. Acquired delayed ejaculation occurs after a period of normal sexual functioning.
Generalized vs. situational. Generalized delayed ejaculation isn't limited to certain sex partners or certain kinds of stimulation. Situational delayed ejaculation occurs only under certain circumstances.
These categories help in diagnosing an underlying cause and determining what might be the most effective treatment.
Your primary care doctor is a good place to start when you have delayed ejaculation. See your doctor if: Delayed ejaculation is an issue for you or your partner, You have another known health problem that might be linked to delayed ejaculation, or you take medications that could be causing the problem, You have other symptoms along with delayed ejaculation that might or might not seem related.
Delayed ejaculation can result from medications, certain chronic health conditions and surgeries. Or it might be caused by substance misuse or a mental health concern, such as depression, anxiety or stress. In many cases, it is due to a combination of physical and psychological concerns.
Psychological causes of delayed ejaculation include: Depression, anxiety or other mental health conditions, Relationship problems due to stress, poor communication or other concerns, Anxiety about performance, Poor body image, Cultural or religious taboos, Differences between the reality of sex with a partner and sexual fantasies.
Medications and other substances that can cause delayed ejaculation include: Some antidepressants, Certain high blood pressure medications, Certain diuretics, Some antipsychotic medications, Some anti-seizure medications, Alcohol — particularly drinking too much (excessive alcohol use or alcoholism).
Physical causes of delayed ejaculation include: Certain birth defects affecting the male reproductive system, Injury to the pelvic nerves that control orgasm, Certain infections, such as a urinary tract infection, Prostate surgery, such as transurethral resection of the prostate or prostate removal, Neurological diseases, such as diabetic neuropathy, stroke or nerve damage to the spinal cord, Hormone-related conditions, such as low thyroid hormone level (hypothyroidism) or low testosterone level (hypogonadism), Retrograde ejaculation, a condition in which the semen goes backward into the bladder rather than out of the penis.
For some men, a minor physical problem that causes a delay in ejaculation might cause anxiety about ejaculating during a sexual encounter. The resulting anxiety might worsen delayed ejaculation.
A number of things can increase your risk of having delayed ejaculation, including: Older age — as men age, it's normal for ejaculation to take longer, Psychological conditions, such as depression or anxiety, Medical conditions, such as diabetes or multiple sclerosis, Certain medical treatments, such as prostate surgery, Medications, particularly certain antidepressants, high blood pressure medications or diuretics, Relationship problems, such as poor communication with your partner, Excessive alcohol use, especially if you're a long-term heavy drinker.
Complications of delayed ejaculation can include: Diminished sexual pleasure for you and your partner, Stress or anxiety about sexual performance, Marital or relationship problems due to an unsatisfactory sex life, Inability to get your partner pregnant (male infertility).
Signs and symptoms of delirium usually begin over a few hours or a few days. They often fluctuate throughout the day, and there may be periods of no symptoms. Symptoms tend to be worse during the night when it's dark and things look less familiar. Primary signs and symptoms include those below.
This may result in: An inability to stay focused on a topic or to switch topics, Getting stuck on an idea rather than responding to questions or conversation, Being easily distracted by unimportant things, Being withdrawn, with little or no activity or little response to the environment.
This may appear as: Poor memory, particularly of recent events, Disorientation — for example, not knowing where you are or who you are, Difficulty speaking or recalling words, Rambling or nonsense speech, Trouble understanding speech, Difficulty reading or writing.
These may include: Seeing things that don't exist (hallucinations), Restlessness, agitation or combative behavior, Calling out, moaning or making other sounds, Being quiet and withdrawn — especially in older adults, Slowed movement or lethargy, Disturbed sleep habits, Reversal of night-day sleep-wake cycle.
These may appear as: Anxiety, fear or paranoia, Depression, Irritability or anger, A sense of feeling elated (euphoria), Apathy, Rapid and unpredictable mood shifts, Personality changes.
Experts have identified three types of delirium:
Hyperactive delirium. Probably the most easily recognized type, this may include restlessness (for example, pacing), agitation, rapid mood changes or hallucinations, and refusal to cooperate with care.
Hypoactive delirium. This may include inactivity or reduced motor activity, sluggishness, abnormal drowsiness, or seeming to be in a daze.
Mixed delirium. This includes both hyperactive and hypoactive signs and symptoms. The person may quickly switch back and forth from hyperactive to hypoactive states.
Dementia and delirium may be particularly difficult to distinguish, and a person may have both. In fact, delirium frequently occurs in people with dementia. But having episodes of delirium does not always mean a person has dementia. So a dementia assessment should not be done during a delirium episode because the results could be misleading.
Dementia is the progressive decline of memory and other thinking skills due to the gradual dysfunction and loss of brain cells. The most common cause of dementia is Alzheimer's disease.
Some differences between the symptoms of delirium and dementia include:
Onset. The onset of delirium occurs within a short time, while dementia usually begins with relatively minor symptoms that gradually worsen over time.
Attention. The ability to stay focused or maintain attention is significantly impaired with delirium. A person in the early stages of dementia remains generally alert.
Fluctuation. The appearance of delirium symptoms can fluctuate significantly and frequently throughout the day. While people with dementia have better and worse times of day, their memory and thinking skills stay at a fairly constant level during the course of a day.
If a relative, friend or someone in your care shows any signs or symptoms of delirium, see a doctor. Your input about the person's symptoms, typical thinking and everyday abilities will be important for a proper diagnosis and for finding the underlying cause.
If you notice signs and symptoms of delirium in a person in a hospital or nursing home, report your concerns to the nursing staff or doctor rather than assuming that those problems have been observed. Older people recovering in the hospital or living in a long-term care facility are particularly at risk of delirium.
Delirium occurs when the normal sending and receiving of signals in the brain become impaired. This impairment is most likely caused by a combination of factors that make the brain vulnerable and trigger a malfunction in brain activity.
Delirium may have a single cause or more than one cause, such as a combination of a medical condition and drug toxicity. Sometimes no cause can be identified. Possible causes include: Certain medications or drug toxicity, Alcohol or drug intoxication or withdrawal, A medical condition, such as a stroke, heart attack, worsening lung or liver disease, or an injury from a fall, Metabolic imbalances, such as low sodium or low calcium, Severe, chronic or terminal illness, Fever and acute infection, particularly in children, Urinary tract infection, pneumonia or the flu, especially in older adults, Exposure to a toxin, such as carbon monoxide, cyanide or other poisons, Malnutrition or dehydration, Sleep deprivation or severe emotional distress, Pain, Surgery or other medical procedures that include anesthesia.
Several medications or combinations of drugs can trigger delirium, including some types of: Pain drugs, Sleep medications, Medications for mood disorders, such as anxiety and depression, Allergy medications (antihistamines), Asthma medications, Steroid medicines called corticosteroids, Parkinson's disease drugs, Drugs for treating spasms or convulsions.
Any condition that results in a hospital stay, especially in intensive care or after surgery, increases the risk of delirium, as does being a resident in a nursing home. Delirium is more common in older adults.
Examples of other conditions that increase the risk of delirium include: Brain disorders such as dementia, stroke or Parkinson's disease, Previous delirium episodes, Visual or hearing impairment, The presence of multiple medical problems.
Delirium may last only a few hours or as long as several weeks or months. If issues contributing to delirium are addressed, the recovery time is often shorter.
The degree of recovery depends to some extent on the health and mental status before the onset of delirium. People with dementia, for example, may experience a significant overall decline in memory and thinking skills. People in better health are more likely to fully recover.
People with other serious, chronic or terminal illnesses may not regain the levels of thinking skills or functioning that they had before the onset of delirium. Delirium in seriously ill people is also more likely to lead to: General decline in health, Poor recovery from surgery, Need for institutional care, Increased risk of death.
Dementia symptoms vary depending on the cause, but common signs and symptoms include: Memory loss, which is usually noticed by a spouse or someone else, Difficulty communicating or finding words, Difficulty with visual and spatial abilities, such as getting lost while driving, Difficulty reasoning or problem-solving, Difficulty handling complex tasks, Difficulty with planning and organizing, Difficulty with coordination and motor functions, Confusion and disorientation.
Personality changes, Depression, Anxiety, Inappropriate behavior, Paranoia, Agitation, Hallucinations.
See a doctor if you or a loved one has memory problems or other dementia symptoms. Some treatable medical conditions can cause dementia symptoms, so it's important to determine the underlying cause.
Dementia is caused by damage to or loss of nerve cells and their connections in the brain. Depending on the area of the brain that's affected by the damage, dementia can affect people differently and cause different symptoms.
Dementias are often grouped by what they have in common, such as the protein or proteins deposited in the brain or the part of the brain that's affected. Some diseases look like dementias, such as those caused by a reaction to medications or vitamin deficiencies, and they might improve with treatment.
Types of dementias that progress and aren't reversible include:
Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause of dementia.
Although not all causes of Alzheimer's disease are known, experts do know that a small percentage are related to mutations of three genes, which can be passed down from parent to child. While several different genes are probably involved in Alzheimer's disease, one important gene that increases risk is apolipoprotein E4 (APOE).
Alzheimer's disease patients have plaques and tangles in their brains. Plaques are clumps of a protein called beta-amyloid, and tangles are fibrous tangles made up of tau protein. It's thought that these clumps damage healthy neurons and the fibers connecting them.
Other genetic factors might make it more likely that people will develop Alzheimer's.
Vascular dementia. This second most common type of dementia is caused by damage to the vessels that supply blood to your brain. Blood vessel problems can cause strokes or damage the brain in other ways, such as by damaging the fibers in the white matter of the brain. The most common symptoms of vascular dementia include difficulties with problem-solving, slowed thinking, focus and organization. These tend to be more noticeable than memory loss.
Lewy body dementia. Lewy bodies are abnormal balloonlike clumps of protein that have been found in the brains of people with Lewy body dementia, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. This is one of the more common types of progressive dementia. Common signs and symptoms include acting out one's dreams in sleep, seeing things that aren't there (visual hallucinations), and problems with focus and attention. Other signs include uncoordinated or slow movement, tremors, and rigidity (parkinsonism).
Frontotemporal dementia. This is a group of diseases characterized by the breakdown (degeneration) of nerve cells and their connections in the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain, the areas generally associated with personality, behavior and language. Common symptoms affect behavior, personality, thinking, judgment, and language and movement.
Mixed dementia. Autopsy studies of the brains of people 80 and older who had dementia indicate that many had a combination of several causes, such as Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia and Lewy body dementia. Studies are ongoing to determine how having mixed dementia affects symptoms and treatments.
Huntington's disease. Caused by a genetic mutation, this disease causes certain nerve cells in your brain and spinal cord to waste away. Signs and symptoms, including a severe decline in thinking (cognitive) skills, usually appear around age 30 or 40.
Traumatic brain injury (TBI). This condition is most often caused by repetitive head trauma. People such as boxers, football players or soldiers might experience TBI.
Depending on the part of the brain that's injured, this condition can cause dementia signs and symptoms such as depression, explosiveness, memory loss and impaired speech. TBI may also cause parkinsonism. Symptoms might not appear until years after the trauma.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. This rare brain disorder usually occurs in people without known risk factors. This condition might be due to deposits of infectious proteins called prions. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease usually has no known cause but can be inherited. It may also be caused by exposure to diseased brain or nervous system tissue, such as from a cornea transplant.
Signs and symptoms of this fatal condition usually appear after age 60.
Parkinson's disease. Many people with Parkinson's disease eventually develop dementia symptoms (Parkinson's disease dementia).
Some causes of dementia or dementia-like symptoms can be reversed with treatment. They include:
Infections and immune disorders. Dementia-like symptoms can result from fever or other side effects of your body's attempt to fight off an infection. Multiple sclerosis and other conditions caused by the body's immune system attacking nerve cells also can cause dementia.
Metabolic problems and endocrine abnormalities. People with thyroid problems, low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), too little or too much sodium or calcium, or problems absorbing vitamin B-12 can develop dementia-like symptoms or other personality changes.
Nutritional deficiencies. Not drinking enough liquids (dehydration); not getting enough thiamin (vitamin B-1), which is common in people with chronic alcoholism; and not getting enough vitamins B-6 and B-12 in your diet can cause dementia-like symptoms. Copper and vitamin E deficiencies also can cause dementia symptoms.
Medication side effects. Side effects of medications, a reaction to a medication or an interaction of several medications can cause dementia-like symptoms.
Subdural hematomas. Bleeding between the surface of the brain and the covering over the brain, which is common in the elderly after a fall, can cause symptoms similar to those of dementia.
Poisoning. Exposure to heavy metals, such as lead, and other poisons, such as pesticides, as well as recreational drug or heavy alcohol use can lead to symptoms of dementia. Symptoms might resolve with treatment.
Brain tumors. Rarely, dementia can result from damage caused by a brain tumor.
Anoxia. This condition, also called hypoxia, occurs when organ tissues aren't getting enough oxygen. Anoxia can occur due to severe sleep apneas, asthma, heart attack, carbon monoxide poisoning or other causes.
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus. This condition, which is caused by enlarged ventricles in the brain, can cause walking problems, urinary difficulty and memory loss.
Many people, especially children and teens, may experience no signs or symptoms during a mild case of dengue fever. When symptoms do occur, they usually begin four to seven days after you are bitten by an infected mosquito.
Dengue fever causes a high fever — 104 F degrees — and at least two of the following symptoms: Headache, Muscle, bone and joint pain, Nausea, Vomiting, Pain behind the eyes, Swollen glands, Rash.
Most people recover within a week or so. In some cases, symptoms worsen and can become life-threatening. Blood vessels often become damaged and leaky. And the number of clot-forming cells (platelets) in your bloodstream drops. This can cause a severe form of dengue fever, called dengue hemorrhagic fever, severe dengue or dengue shock syndrome.
Signs and symptoms of dengue hemorrhagic fever or severe dengue — a life-threatening emergency — include: Severe abdominal pain, Persistent vomiting, Bleeding from your gums or nose, Blood in your urine, stools or vomit, Bleeding under the skin, which might look like bruising, Difficult or rapid breathing, Cold or clammy skin (shock), Fatigue, Irritability or restlessness.
Call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room if you've recently visited a region in which dengue fever is known to occur and you develop emergency symptoms, such as severe abdominal pain, vomiting, difficulty breathing, or blood in your nose, gums, vomit or stools.
If you develop a fever and milder symptoms common to dengue fever, call your doctor.
Dengue fever is caused by any one of four types of dengue viruses spread by mosquitoes that thrive in and near human lodgings. When a mosquito bites a person infected with a dengue virus, the virus enters the mosquito. When the infected mosquito then bites another person, the virus enters that person's bloodstream.
After you've recovered from dengue fever, you have immunity to the type of virus that infected you — but not to the other three dengue fever virus types. The risk of developing severe dengue fever, also known as dengue hemorrhagic fever, actually increases if you're infected a second, third or fourth time.
Factors that put you at greater risk of developing dengue fever or a more severe form of the disease include:
Living or traveling in tropical areas. Being in tropical and subtropical areas increases your risk of exposure to the virus that causes dengue fever. Especially high-risk areas are Southeast Asia, the western Pacific islands, Latin America and the Caribbean.
Prior infection with a dengue fever virus. Previous infection with a dengue fever virus increases your risk of having severe symptoms if you're infected again.
If severe, dengue fever can damage the lungs, liver or heart. Blood pressure can drop to dangerous levels, causing shock and, in some cases, death.
Persistent and recurrent episodes of depersonalization or derealization or both cause distress and problems functioning at work or school or in other important areas of your life. During these episodes, you are aware that your sense of detachment is only a feeling and not reality.
The experience and feelings of the disorder can be difficult to describe. Worry about "going crazy" can cause you to become preoccupied with checking that you exist and determining what's actually real.
Symptoms usually begin in the mid- to late teens or early adulthood. Depersonalization-derealization disorder is rare in children and older adults.
Symptoms of depersonalization include: Feelings that you're an outside observer of your thoughts, feelings, your body or parts of your body — for example, as if you were floating in air above yourself, Feeling like a robot or that you're not in control of your speech or movements, The sense that your body, legs or arms appear distorted, enlarged or shrunken, or that your head is wrapped in cotton, Emotional or physical numbness of your senses or responses to the world around you, A sense that your memories lack emotion, and that they may or may not be your own memories.
Symptoms of derealization include: Feelings of being alienated from or unfamiliar with your surroundings — for example, like you're living in a movie or a dream, Feeling emotionally disconnected from people you care about, as if you were separated by a glass wall, Surroundings that appear distorted, blurry, colorless, two-dimensional or artificial, or a heightened awareness and clarity of your surroundings, Distortions in perception of time, such as recent events feeling like distant past, Distortions of distance and the size and shape of objects.
Episodes of depersonalization-derealization disorder may last hours, days, weeks or even months at a time. In some people, these episodes turn into ongoing feelings of depersonalization or derealization that may periodically get better or worse.
Passing feelings of depersonalization or derealization are common and aren't necessarily a cause for concern. But ongoing or severe feelings of detachment and distortion of your surroundings can be a sign of depersonalization-derealization disorder or another physical or mental health disorder.
See a doctor if you have feelings of depersonalization or derealization that: Are disturbing you or are emotionally disruptive, Don't go away or keep coming back, Interfere with work, relationships or daily activities.
The exact cause of depersonalization-derealization disorder isn't well-understood. Some people may be more vulnerable to experiencing depersonalization and derealization than others, possibly due to genetic and environmental factors. Heightened states of stress and fear may trigger episodes.
Symptoms of depersonalization-derealization disorder may be related to childhood trauma or other experiences or events that cause severe emotional stress or trauma.
Factors that may increase the risk of depersonalization-derealization disorder include: Certain personality traits that make you want to avoid or deny difficult situations or make it hard to adapt to difficult situations, Severe trauma, during childhood or as an adult, such as experiencing or witnessing a traumatic event or abuse, Severe stress, such as major relationship, financial or work-related issues, Depression or anxiety, especially severe or prolonged depression, or anxiety with panic attacks, Using recreational drugs, which can trigger episodes of depersonalization or derealization.
Episodes of depersonalization or derealization can be frightening and disabling. They can cause: Difficulty focusing on tasks or remembering things, Interference with work and other routine activities, Problems in relationships with your family and friends, Anxiety or depression, A sense of hopelessness.
Although depression may occur only once during your life, people typically have multiple episodes. During these episodes, symptoms occur most of the day, nearly every day and may include: Feelings of sadness, tearfulness, emptiness or hopelessness, Angry outbursts, irritability or frustration, even over small matters, Loss of interest or pleasure in most or all normal activities, such as sex, hobbies or sports, Sleep disturbances, including insomnia or sleeping too much, Tiredness and lack of energy, so even small tasks take extra effort, Reduced appetite and weight loss or increased cravings for food and weight gain, Anxiety, agitation or restlessness, Slowed thinking, speaking or body movements, Feelings of worthlessness or guilt, fixating on past failures or self-blame, Trouble thinking, concentrating, making decisions and remembering things, Frequent or recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts or suicide, Unexplained physical problems, such as back pain or headaches.
For many people with depression, symptoms usually are severe enough to cause noticeable problems in day-to-day activities, such as work, school, social activities or relationships with others. Some people may feel generally miserable or unhappy without really knowing why.
Common signs and symptoms of depression in children and teenagers are similar to those of adults, but there can be some differences.
In younger children, symptoms of depression may include sadness, irritability, clinginess, worry, aches and pains, refusing to go to school, or being underweight.
In teens, symptoms may include sadness, irritability, feeling negative and worthless, anger, poor performance or poor attendance at school, feeling misunderstood and extremely sensitive, using recreational drugs or alcohol, eating or sleeping too much, self-harm, loss of interest in normal activities, and avoidance of social interaction.
Depression is not a normal part of growing older, and it should never be taken lightly. Unfortunately, depression often goes undiagnosed and untreated in older adults, and they may feel reluctant to seek help. Symptoms of depression may be different or less obvious in older adults, such as: Memory difficulties or personality changes, Physical aches or pain, Fatigue, loss of appetite, sleep problems or loss of interest in sex — not caused by a medical condition or medication, Often wanting to stay at home, rather than going out to socialize or doing new things, Suicidal thinking or feelings, especially in older men.
If you feel depressed, make an appointment to see your doctor or mental health professional as soon as you can. If you're reluctant to seek treatment, talk to a friend or loved one, any health care professional, a faith leader, or someone else you trust.
If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
Also consider these options if you're having suicidal thoughts:
Call your doctor or mental health professional.
Call a suicide hotline number — in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255). Use that same number and press "1" to reach the Veterans Crisis Line.
Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.
If you have a loved one who is in danger of suicide or has made a suicide attempt, make sure someone stays with that person. Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately. Or, if you think you can do so safely, take the person to the nearest hospital emergency room.
It's not known exactly what causes depression. As with many mental disorders, a variety of factors may be involved, such as:
Biological differences. People with depression appear to have physical changes in their brains. The significance of these changes is still uncertain, but may eventually help pinpoint causes.
Brain chemistry. Neurotransmitters are naturally occurring brain chemicals that likely play a role in depression. Recent research indicates that changes in the function and effect of these neurotransmitters and how they interact with neurocircuits involved in maintaining mood stability may play a significant role in depression and its treatment.
Hormones. Changes in the body's balance of hormones may be involved in causing or triggering depression. Hormone changes can result with pregnancy and during the weeks or months after delivery (postpartum) and from thyroid problems, menopause or a number of other conditions.
Inherited traits. Depression is more common in people whose blood relatives also have this condition. Researchers are trying to find genes that may be involved in causing depression.
Depression often begins in the teens, 20s or 30s, but it can happen at any age. More women than men are diagnosed with depression, but this may be due in part because women are more likely to seek treatment.
Factors that seem to increase the risk of developing or triggering depression include: Certain personality traits, such as low self-esteem and being too dependent, self-critical or pessimistic, Traumatic or stressful events, such as physical or sexual abuse, the death or loss of a loved one, a difficult relationship, or financial problems, Blood relatives with a history of depression, bipolar disorder, alcoholism or suicide, Being lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender, or having variations in the development of genital organs that aren't clearly male or female (intersex) in an unsupportive situation, History of other mental health disorders, such as anxiety disorder, eating disorders or post-traumatic stress disorder, Abuse of alcohol or recreational drugs, Serious or chronic illness, including cancer, stroke, chronic pain or heart disease, Certain medications, such as some high blood pressure medications or sleeping pills (talk to your doctor before stopping any medication).
Depression is a serious disorder that can take a terrible toll on you and your family. Depression often gets worse if it isn't treated, resulting in emotional, behavioral and health problems that affect every area of your life.
Examples of complications associated with depression include: Excess weight or obesity, which can lead to heart disease and diabetes, Pain or physical illness, Alcohol or drug misuse, Anxiety, panic disorder or social phobia, Family conflicts, relationship difficulties, and work or school problems, Social isolation, Suicidal feelings, suicide attempts or suicide, Self-mutilation, such as cutting, Premature death from medical conditions.
Each type of dermatitis may look a little different and tends to occur on different parts of your body. Signs and symptoms of different types of dermatitis include:
Atopic dermatitis (eczema). Usually beginning in infancy, this red, itchy rash usually occurs where the skin flexes — inside the elbows, behind the knees and in front of the neck. The rash may leak fluid when scratched and crust over. People with atopic dermatitis may experience improvement and then seasonal flare-ups.
Contact dermatitis. This red, itchy stinging rash occurs where your skin has come into contact with substances that irritate the skin or cause an allergic reaction. You may develop blisters.
Seborrheic dermatitis. This condition causes scaly patches, red skin and stubborn dandruff. It usually affects oily areas of the body, such as the face, upper chest and back. Seborrheic dermatitis can be a long-term condition with periods of improvement and then seasonal flare-ups. In infants, this condition is called cradle cap.
Follicular eczema. With this type, the affected skin thickens and develops bumps in hair follicles. This condition is common in African Americans and in people with dark-brown skin.
See your doctor if: You're so uncomfortable that you are losing sleep or are distracted from your daily routines, Your skin becomes painful, You suspect your skin is infected, You've tried self-care steps but your signs and symptoms persist.
Causes of the most common types of dermatitis include:
Atopic dermatitis (eczema). This type is likely related to dry skin, a gene variation, an immune system dysfunction, a skin infection, exposure to food, airborne, or contact allergens, or a combination of these.
Contact dermatitis. This type results from contact with something that irritates your skin or causes an allergic reaction. Irritants or allergens include poison ivy, perfumes, jewelry containing nickel, cleaning products, and the preservatives in many creams and lotions.
Seborrheic dermatitis. This type is caused by a yeast (fungus) that is in the oil secretion on the skin.
Common risk factors for dermatitis include:
Age. Dermatitis can occur at any age, but atopic dermatitis (eczema) usually begins in infancy.
Allergies and asthma. People who have a personal or family history of eczema, allergies, hay fever or asthma are more likely to develop atopic dermatitis.
Occupation. Jobs that put you in contact with certain metals, solvents or cleaning supplies increase your risk of contact dermatitis. Being a health care worker is linked to hand eczema.
Health conditions. Health conditions that put you at increased risk of seborrheic dermatitis include congestive heart failure, Parkinson's disease and HIV/AIDS.
Scratching the itchy rash associated with dermatitis can cause open sores, which may become infected. These skin infections can spread and may very rarely become life-threatening.
Signs and symptoms of dermatographia may include: Raised red lines, Swelling, Inflammation, Hive-like welts, Itching.
The signs and symptoms may occur within a few minutes of your skin being rubbed or scratched and usually disappear within 30 minutes. Rarely, dermatographia develops more slowly and lasts several hours to several days.
The condition itself can last for months or years.
See your doctor if your signs and symptoms are particularly bothersome.
The exact cause of dermatographia isn't clear. It may be caused by an allergic response, yet no specific allergen has been identified.
Simple things can trigger symptoms of dermatographia. For example, rubbing from your clothes or bedsheets may irritate your skin. Sometimes, dermatographia is preceded by an infection, emotional upset or medications, such as penicillin.
Dermatographia can occur at any age, but it tends to be more common in teenagers and young adults. If you have other skin conditions, such as dry skin or dermatitis, you may be more susceptible to dermatographia. Any skin condition that causes a frequent urge to scratch may increase your risk.
The signs and symptoms of dermatomyositis can appear suddenly or develop gradually over time. The most common signs and symptoms include:
Skin changes. A violet-colored or dusky red rash develops, most commonly on your face and eyelids and on your knuckles, elbows, knees, chest and back. The rash, which can be itchy and painful, is often the first sign of dermatomyositis.
Muscle weakness. Progressive muscle weakness involves the muscles closest to the trunk, such as those in your hips, thighs, shoulders, upper arms and neck. The weakness affects both the left and right sides of your body, and tends to gradually worsen.
Seek medical attention if you develop muscle weakness or an unexplained rash.
The cause of dermatomyositis is unknown, but the disease has much in common with autoimmune disorders, in which your immune system mistakenly attacks your body tissues.
Genetic and environmental factors also might play a role. Environmental factors could include viral infections, sun exposure, certain medications and smoking.
Possible complications of dermatomyositis include:
Difficulty swallowing. If the muscles in your esophagus are affected, you can have problems swallowing, which can cause weight loss and malnutrition.
Aspiration pneumonia. Difficulty swallowing can also cause you to breathe food or liquids, including saliva, into your lungs.
Breathing problems. If the condition affects your chest muscles, you might have breathing problems, such as shortness of breath.
Calcium deposits. These can occur in your muscles, skin and connective tissues as the disease progresses. These deposits are more common in children with dermatomyositis and develop earlier in the course of the disease.
Dermatomyositis might cause other conditions or put you at higher risk of developing them, including:
Raynaud's phenomenon. This condition causes your fingers, toes, cheeks, nose and ears to turn pale when exposed to cold temperatures.
Other connective tissue diseases. Other conditions — such as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma and Sjogren's syndrome — can occur with dermatomyositis.
Cardiovascular disease. Dermatomyositis can cause heart muscle inflammation. In a small number of people who have dermatomyositis, congestive heart failure and heart rhythm problems develop.
Lung disease. Interstitial lung disease can occur with dermatomyositis. Interstitial lung disease refers to a group of disorders that cause scarring of lung tissue, making the lungs stiff and inelastic. Signs include a dry cough and shortness of breath.
Cancer. Dermatomyositis in adults has been linked to an increased likelihood of developing cancer, particularly ovarian cancer in women. Risk of cancer appears to level off three years or so after a diagnosis of dermatomyositis.
Desmoid tumor symptoms differ based on where the tumors occur. Desmoid tumors most often happen in the abdomen, arms and legs. But they can form anywhere in the body.
In general, signs and symptoms include: A mass or area of swelling, Pain, Loss of function in the affected area, Cramping and nausea, when desmoid tumors occur in the abdomen.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes desmoid tumors.
Doctors know these tumors form when a connective tissue cell develops changes in its DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The changes tell the connective tissue cell to multiply rapidly, creating a mass of cells (tumor) that can invade and destroy healthy body tissue.
Most septal deformities result in no symptoms, and you may not even know you have a deviated septum. Some septal deformities, however, may cause the following signs and symptoms:
Obstruction of one or both nostrils. This blockage (obstruction) can make it difficult to breathe through the nostril or nostrils. You may notice this more when you have a cold (upper respiratory tract infection) or allergies that can cause your nasal passages to swell and narrow.
Nosebleeds. The surface of your nasal septum may become dry, increasing your risk of nosebleeds.
Facial pain. There is some debate about the possible nasal causes of facial pain. A possible cause of one-sided facial pain could be a severe deviated septum in which surfaces within the nose touch and cause pressure.
Noisy breathing during sleep. A deviated septum or swelling of the intranasal tissues can be one of the many reasons for noisy breathing during sleep.
Awareness of the nasal cycle. It is normal for the nose to alternate being obstructed on one side, then change to being obstructed on the other. This is called the nasal cycle. The nasal cycle is normal, but being aware of the nasal cycle isn't typical and can indicate nasal obstruction.
Preference for sleeping on a particular side. Some people may prefer to sleep on a particular side in order to optimize breathing through the nose at night if one nasal passage is narrowed.
See your doctor if you experience: A blocked nostril (or nostrils) that doesn't respond to treatment, Frequent nosebleeds, Recurring sinus infections.
A deviated septum occurs when your nasal septum — the thin wall that separates your right and left nasal passages — is displaced to one side.
A deviated septum can be caused by:
A condition present at birth. In some cases, a deviated septum occurs during fetal development and is apparent at birth.
Injury to the nose. A deviated septum can also be the result of an injury that causes the nasal septum to be moved out of position.
In infants, such an injury may occur during childbirth. In children and adults, a wide array of accidents may lead to a nose injury and deviated septum. Trauma to the nose most commonly occurs during contact sports, rough play such as wrestling or automobile accidents.
The normal aging process may affect nasal structures, worsening a deviated septum over time.
Swelling and irritation of the nasal cavities (rhinitis) or sinus cavities (rhinosinusitis) also can further narrow the nasal passage from a deviated septum, resulting in nasal obstruction.
For some people, a deviated septum is present at birth — occurring during fetal development or due to injury during childbirth. After birth, a deviated septum is most commonly caused by an injury that moves your nasal septum out of place. Risk factors include: Playing contact sports, Not wearing your seat belt while riding in a motorized vehicle.
If you have a severely deviated septum causing nasal blockage (obstruction), it can lead to: Dry mouth, due to chronic mouth breathing, A feeling of pressure or congestion in your nasal passages, Disturbed sleep, due to the unpleasantness of not being able to breathe comfortably through your nose at night.
Signs and symptoms of diabetes insipidus include: Extreme thirst, Producing large amounts of diluted urine, Frequent need to get up to urinate during the night, Preference for cold drinks.
If your condition is serious, urine output can be as much as 20 quarts (about 19 liters) a day if you're drinking a lot of fluids. A healthy adult typically urinates an average of 1 or 2 quarts (about 1 to 2 liters) a day.
An infant or young child with diabetes insipidus may have the following signs and symptoms: Heavy, wet diapers, Bed-wetting, Trouble sleeping, Fever, Vomiting, Constipation, Delayed growth, Weight loss.
See your doctor immediately if you notice excessive urination and extreme thirst.
Diabetes insipidus occurs when your body can't properly balance the body's fluid levels.
When your fluid regulation system is working properly, your kidneys help maintain this balance. The kidneys remove fluids from your bloodstream. This fluid waste is temporarily stored in your bladder as urine, until you urinate. The body can also rid itself of excess fluids through sweating, breathing or diarrhea.
A hormone called anti-diuretic hormone (ADH), or vasopressin, helps control how fast or slow fluids are excreted. ADH is made in a part of the brain called the hypothalamus and stored in the pituitary gland, a small gland found in the base of the brain.
If you have diabetes insipidus, your body can't properly balance fluid levels. The cause varies depending on the type of diabetes insipidus you have:
Central diabetes insipidus. Damage to the pituitary gland or hypothalamus from surgery, a tumor, a head injury or an illness can cause central diabetes insipidus by affecting the usual production, storage and release of ADH. An inherited genetic disease can also cause this condition.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus occurs when there's a defect in the kidney tubules — the structures in your kidneys that cause water to be excreted or reabsorbed. This defect makes your kidneys unable to properly respond to ADH.
The defect may be due to an inherited (genetic) disorder or a chronic kidney disorder. Certain drugs, such as lithium or antiviral medications such as foscarnet (Foscavir), also can cause nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
Gestational diabetes insipidus. Gestational diabetes insipidus is rare. It occurs only during pregnancy when an enzyme made by the placenta destroys ADH in the mother.
Primary polydipsia. Also known as dipsogenic diabetes insipidus, this condition can cause production of large amounts of diluted urine. The underlying cause is drinking an excessive amount of fluids.
Primary polydipsia can be caused by damage to the thirst-regulating mechanism in the hypothalamus. The condition has also been linked to mental illness, such as schizophrenia.
Sometimes, there's no obvious cause of diabetes insipidus. However, in some people, the disorder may be the result of an autoimmune reaction that causes the immune system to damage the cells that make vasopressin.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus that's present at or shortly after birth usually has an inherited (genetic) cause that permanently changes the kidneys' ability to concentrate the urine. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus usually affects males, though women can pass the gene on to their children.
Diabetes insipidus may lead to dehydration. Dehydration can cause: Dry mouth, Changes in skin elasticity, Thirst, Fatigue.
Diabetes insipidus can cause an imbalance in electrolytes — minerals in your blood, such as sodium and potassium, that maintain the fluid balance in your body. Symptoms of an electrolyte imbalance may include: Weakness, Nausea, Vomiting, Loss of appetite, Muscle cramps, Confusion.
Diabetes symptoms vary depending on how much your blood sugar is elevated. Some people, especially those with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes, may not experience symptoms initially. In type 1 diabetes, symptoms tend to come on quickly and be more severe.
Some of the signs and symptoms of type 1 and type 2 diabetes are: Increased thirst, Frequent urination, Extreme hunger, Unexplained weight loss, Presence of ketones in the urine (ketones are a byproduct of the breakdown of muscle and fat that happens when there's not enough available insulin), Fatigue, Irritability, Blurred vision, Slow-healing sores, Frequent infections, such as gums or skin infections and vaginal infections.
Type 1 diabetes can develop at any age, though it often appears during childhood or adolescence. Type 2 diabetes, the more common type, can develop at any age, though it's more common in people older than 40.
If you suspect you or your child may have diabetes. If you notice any possible diabetes symptoms, contact your doctor. The earlier the condition is diagnosed, the sooner treatment can begin.
If you've already been diagnosed with diabetes. After you receive your diagnosis, you'll need close medical follow-up until your blood sugar levels stabilize.
To understand diabetes, first you must understand how glucose is normally processed in the body.
Insulin is a hormone that comes from a gland situated behind and below the stomach (pancreas).
The pancreas secretes insulin into the bloodstream.
The insulin circulates, enabling sugar to enter your cells.
Insulin lowers the amount of sugar in your bloodstream.
As your blood sugar level drops, so does the secretion of insulin from your pancreas.
Glucose — a sugar — is a source of energy for the cells that make up muscles and other tissues.
Glucose comes from two major sources: food and your liver.
Sugar is absorbed into the bloodstream, where it enters cells with the help of insulin.
Your liver stores and makes glucose.
When your glucose levels are low, such as when you haven't eaten in a while, the liver breaks down stored glycogen into glucose to keep your glucose level within a normal range.
The exact cause of type 1 diabetes is unknown. What is known is that your immune system — which normally fights harmful bacteria or viruses — attacks and destroys your insulin-producing cells in the pancreas. This leaves you with little or no insulin. Instead of being transported into your cells, sugar builds up in your bloodstream.
Type 1 is thought to be caused by a combination of genetic susceptibility and environmental factors, though exactly what those factors are is still unclear. Weight is not believed to be a factor in type 1 diabetes.
In prediabetes — which can lead to type 2 diabetes — and in type 2 diabetes, your cells become resistant to the action of insulin, and your pancreas is unable to make enough insulin to overcome this resistance. Instead of moving into your cells where it's needed for energy, sugar builds up in your bloodstream.
Exactly why this happens is uncertain, although it's believed that genetic and environmental factors play a role in the development of type 2 diabetes too. Being overweight is strongly linked to the development of type 2 diabetes, but not everyone with type 2 is overweight.
During pregnancy, the placenta produces hormones to sustain your pregnancy. These hormones make your cells more resistant to insulin.
Normally, your pancreas responds by producing enough extra insulin to overcome this resistance. But sometimes your pancreas can't keep up. When this happens, too little glucose gets into your cells and too much stays in your blood, resulting in gestational diabetes.
Risk factors for diabetes depend on the type of diabetes.
Although the exact cause of type 1 diabetes is unknown, factors that may signal an increased risk include:
Family history. Your risk increases if a parent or sibling has type 1 diabetes.
Environmental factors. Circumstances such as exposure to a viral illness likely play some role in type 1 diabetes.
The presence of damaging immune system cells (autoantibodies). Sometimes family members of people with type 1 diabetes are tested for the presence of diabetes autoantibodies. If you have these autoantibodies, you have an increased risk of developing type 1 diabetes. But not everyone who has these autoantibodies develops diabetes.
Geography. Certain countries, such as Finland and Sweden, have higher rates of type 1 diabetes.
Researchers don't fully understand why some people develop prediabetes and type 2 diabetes and others don't. It's clear that certain factors increase the risk, however, including:
Weight. The more fatty tissue you have, the more resistant your cells become to insulin.
Inactivity. The less active you are, the greater your risk. Physical activity helps you control your weight, uses up glucose as energy and makes your cells more sensitive to insulin.
Family history. Your risk increases if a parent or sibling has type 2 diabetes.
Race or ethnicity. Although it's unclear why, certain people — including Black, Hispanic, American Indian and Asian American people — are at higher risk.
Age. Your risk increases as you get older. This may be because you tend to exercise less, lose muscle mass and gain weight as you age. But type 2 diabetes is also increasing among children, adolescents and younger adults.
Gestational diabetes. If you developed gestational diabetes when you were pregnant, your risk of developing prediabetes and type 2 diabetes later increases. If you gave birth to a baby weighing more than 9 pounds (4 kilograms), you're also at risk of type 2 diabetes.
Polycystic ovary syndrome. For women, having polycystic ovary syndrome — a common condition characterized by irregular menstrual periods, excess hair growth and obesity — increases the risk of diabetes.
High blood pressure. Having blood pressure over 140/90 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) is linked to an increased risk of type 2 diabetes.
Abnormal cholesterol and triglyceride levels. If you have low levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL), or "good," cholesterol, your risk of type 2 diabetes is higher. Triglycerides are another type of fat carried in the blood. People with high levels of triglycerides have an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. Your doctor can let you know what your cholesterol and triglyceride levels are.
Any pregnant woman can develop gestational diabetes, but some women are at greater risk than are others. Risk factors for gestational diabetes include:
Age. Women older than age 25 are at increased risk.
Family or personal history. Your risk increases if you have prediabetes — a precursor to type 2 diabetes — or if a close family member, such as a parent or sibling, has type 2 diabetes. You're also at greater risk if you had gestational diabetes during a previous pregnancy, if you delivered a very large baby or if you had an unexplained stillbirth.
Weight. Being overweight before pregnancy increases your risk.
Race. For reasons that aren't clear, women who are black, Hispanic, American Indian or Asian are more likely to develop gestational diabetes.
Long-term complications of diabetes develop gradually. The longer you have diabetes — and the less controlled your blood sugar — the higher the risk of complications. Eventually, diabetes complications may be disabling or even life-threatening. Possible complications include:
Cardiovascular disease. Diabetes dramatically increases the risk of various cardiovascular problems, including coronary artery disease with chest pain (angina), heart attack, stroke and narrowing of arteries (atherosclerosis). If you have diabetes, you're more likely to have heart disease or stroke.
Nerve damage (neuropathy). Excess sugar can injure the walls of the tiny blood vessels (capillaries) that nourish your nerves, especially in your legs. This can cause tingling, numbness, burning or pain that usually begins at the tips of the toes or fingers and gradually spreads upward.
Left untreated, you could lose all sense of feeling in the affected limbs. Damage to the nerves related to digestion can cause problems with nausea, vomiting, diarrhea or constipation. For men, it may lead to erectile dysfunction.
Kidney damage (nephropathy). The kidneys contain millions of tiny blood vessel clusters (glomeruli) that filter waste from your blood. Diabetes can damage this delicate filtering system. Severe damage can lead to kidney failure or irreversible end-stage kidney disease, which may require dialysis or a kidney transplant.
Eye damage (retinopathy). Diabetes can damage the blood vessels of the retina (diabetic retinopathy), potentially leading to blindness. Diabetes also increases the risk of other serious vision conditions, such as cataracts and glaucoma.
Foot damage. Nerve damage in the feet or poor blood flow to the feet increases the risk of various foot complications. Left untreated, cuts and blisters can develop serious infections, which often heal poorly. These infections may ultimately require toe, foot or leg amputation.
Skin conditions. Diabetes may leave you more susceptible to skin problems, including bacterial and fungal infections.
Hearing impairment. Hearing problems are more common in people with diabetes.
Alzheimer's disease. Type 2 diabetes may increase the risk of dementia, such as Alzheimer's disease. The poorer your blood sugar control, the greater the risk appears to be. Although there are theories as to how these disorders might be connected, none has yet been proved.
Depression. Depression symptoms are common in people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Depression can affect diabetes management.
Most women who have gestational diabetes deliver healthy babies. However, untreated or uncontrolled blood sugar levels can cause problems for you and your baby.
Complications in your baby can occur as a result of gestational diabetes, including:
Excess growth. Extra glucose can cross the placenta, which triggers your baby's pancreas to make extra insulin. This can cause your baby to grow too large (macrosomia). Very large babies are more likely to require a C-section birth.
Low blood sugar. Sometimes babies of mothers with gestational diabetes develop low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) shortly after birth because their own insulin production is high. Prompt feedings and sometimes an intravenous glucose solution can return the baby's blood sugar level to normal.
Type 2 diabetes later in life. Babies of mothers who have gestational diabetes have a higher risk of developing obesity and type 2 diabetes later in life.
Death. Untreated gestational diabetes can result in a baby's death either before or shortly after birth.
Complications in the mother also can occur as a result of gestational diabetes, including:
Preeclampsia. This condition is characterized by high blood pressure, excess protein in the urine, and swelling in the legs and feet. Preeclampsia can lead to serious or even life-threatening complications for both mother and baby.
Subsequent gestational diabetes. Once you've had gestational diabetes in one pregnancy, you're more likely to have it again with the next pregnancy. You're also more likely to develop diabetes — typically type 2 diabetes — as you get older.
Prediabetes may develop into type 2 diabetes.
Before developing a diabetic coma, you'll usually experience signs and symptoms of high blood sugar or low blood sugar.
If your blood sugar level is too high, you may experience: Increased thirst, Frequent urination, Fatigue, Nausea and vomiting, Shortness of breath, Stomach pain, Fruity breath odor, A very dry mouth, A rapid heartbeat.
Signs and symptoms of a low blood sugar level may include: Shakiness or nervousness, Anxiety, Fatigue, Weakness, Sweating, Hunger, Nausea, Dizziness or lightheadedness, Difficulty speaking, Confusion.
Some people, especially those who've had diabetes for a long time, develop a condition known as hypoglycemia unawareness and won't have the warning signs that signal a drop in blood sugar.
If you experience any symptoms of high or low blood sugar, test your blood sugar and follow your diabetes treatment plan based on the test results. If you don't start to feel better quickly, or you start to feel worse, call for emergency help.
A diabetic coma is a medical emergency. If you feel extreme high or low blood sugar signs or symptoms and think you might pass out, call 911 or your local emergency number. If you're with someone with diabetes who has passed out, call for emergency help, and be sure to let the emergency personnel know that the unconscious person has diabetes.
Blood sugar that's either too high or too low for too long may cause various serious conditions, all of which can lead to a diabetic coma.
Diabetic ketoacidosis. If your muscle cells become starved for energy, your body may respond by breaking down fat stores. This process forms toxic acids known as ketones. If you have ketones (measured in blood or urine) and high blood sugar, the condition is called diabetic ketoacidosis. Left untreated, it can lead to a diabetic coma.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is most common in type 1 diabetes but sometimes occurs in type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes.
Diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome. If your blood sugar level tops 600 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL), or 33.3 millimoles per liter (mmol/L), the condition is called diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome.
Severely high blood sugar turns your blood thick and syrupy. The excess sugar passes from your blood into your urine, which triggers a filtering process that draws tremendous amounts of fluid from your body. Left untreated, this can lead to life-threatening dehydration and a diabetic coma. About 25 to 50 percent of people with diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome develop a coma.
Hypoglycemia. Your brain needs glucose to function. In severe cases, low blood sugar may cause you to pass out. Hypoglycemia can be caused by too much insulin or not enough food. Exercising too vigorously or drinking too much alcohol can have the same effect.
Anyone who has diabetes is at risk of a diabetic coma, but the following factors can increase the risk:
Insulin delivery problems. If you're on an insulin pump, you have to check your blood sugar frequently. Insulin delivery can stop if the pump fails or the tubing (catheter) is twisted or falls out of place. A lack of insulin can lead to diabetic ketoacidosis.
An illness, trauma or surgery. When you're sick or injured, blood sugar levels tend to rise, sometimes dramatically. This may cause diabetic ketoacidosis if you have type 1 diabetes and don't increase your insulin dosage to compensate.
Medical conditions, such as congestive heart failure or kidney disease, also may increase your risk of diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome.
Poorly managed diabetes. If you don't monitor your blood sugar properly or take your medications as directed, you'll have a higher risk of developing long-term complications and a diabetic coma.
Deliberately skipping meals or insulin. Sometimes, people with diabetes who also have an eating disorder choose not to use their insulin as directed with the hope of losing weight. This is a dangerous, life-threatening practice that increases the risk of a diabetic coma.
Drinking alcohol. Alcohol can have unpredictable effects on your blood sugar. Alcohol's sedating effects may make it harder for you to know when you're having low blood sugar symptoms. This can increase your risk of a diabetic coma caused by hypoglycemia.
Illegal drug use. Illegal drugs, such as cocaine and ecstasy, can increase your risk of severe high blood sugar levels and conditions linked to diabetic coma.
Left untreated, a diabetic coma can lead to: Permanent brain damage, Death.
Diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome can take days or weeks to develop. Possible signs and symptoms include: Blood sugar level of 600 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) or 33.3 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) or higher, Excessive thirst, Dry mouth, Increased urination, Warm, dry skin, Fever, Drowsiness, confusion, Hallucinations, Vision loss, Convulsions, Coma.
Consult your doctor if your blood sugar is persistently higher than the target range your doctor recommends or if you have signs or symptoms of diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome, such as those listed above.
Seek emergency care if:
Your blood sugar level is 400 mg/dL (22.2 mmol/L) or higher and doesn't improve despite following your doctor's instructions for treatment. Don't wait until your blood sugar is high enough to cause diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome.
You have confusion, vision changes or other signs of dehydration.
Diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome may be triggered by: Illness or infection, Not following a diabetes treatment plan or having an inadequate treatment plan, Certain medications, such as water pills (diuretics).
Sometimes undiagnosed diabetes results in diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome.
Your risk of developing diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome might be higher if you:
Have type 2 diabetes. If you don't monitor your blood sugar or you don't yet know you have type 2 diabetes, your risk is higher.
Are older than age 65.
Have another chronic health condition, such as heart disease or kidney disease.
Have an infection, such as pneumonia, a urinary tract infection or a virus, which causes blood sugar levels to rise.
Take certain medications. Some drugs — such as corticosteroids (prednisone), diuretics (hydrochlorothiazide and chlorthalidone) and certain inhalers such as terbutaline.
Diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome can lead to: Seizures, Heart attack, Stroke, Coma.
Without prompt treatment, diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome can be fatal.
Initial signs and symptoms of diabetic hypoglycemia include: Shakiness, Dizziness, Sweating, Hunger, Fast heartbeat, Inability to concentrate, Confusion, Irritability or moodiness, Anxiety or nervousness, Headache.
If diabetic hypoglycemia occurs when you're sleeping, signs and symptoms that may awaken you include: Damp sheets or nightclothes due to perspiration, Nightmares, Tiredness, irritability or confusion upon waking.
If diabetic hypoglycemia isn't treated, signs and symptoms of severe hypoglycemia can occur. These include: Clumsiness or jerky movements, Inability to eat or drink, Muscle weakness, Difficulty speaking or slurred speech, Blurry or double vision, Drowsiness, Confusion, Convulsions or seizures, Unconsciousness, Death, rarely.
Symptoms can differ from person to person or from episode to episode. Some people don't have any noticeable symptoms. It's also possible you won't have any symptoms of hypoglycemia, so it's important to monitor your blood sugar levels regularly and keep track of how you're feeling when your blood sugar is low.
Severe hypoglycemia can lead to serious problems, including seizures or unconsciousness, that require emergency care. Make sure your family, friends and co-workers know what to do in an emergency.
If you're with someone who loses consciousness or can't swallow due to low blood sugar: Don't inject insulin, as this will cause blood sugar levels to drop even further, Don't give fluids or food, because these could cause choking, Give glucagon — a hormone that stimulates the release of sugar into the blood — through injection or nasally, Call 911 or emergency services in your area for immediate treatment if glucagon isn't on hand.
If you have symptoms of hypoglycemia several times a week or more, see your doctor. You may need to change your medication dosage or timing, or otherwise adjust your diabetes treatment regimen.
Low blood sugar is most common among people who take insulin, but it can also occur if you're taking certain oral diabetes medications.
Common causes of diabetic hypoglycemia include: Taking too much insulin or diabetes medication, Not eating enough, Postponing or skipping a meal or snack, Increasing exercise or physical activity without eating more or adjusting your medications, Drinking alcohol.
The hormone insulin lowers blood sugar levels when blood sugar is too high. If you have type 1 or type 2 diabetes and need insulin to control your blood sugar, taking more insulin than you need can cause your blood sugar level to drop too low and result in hypoglycemia.
Your blood sugar can also drop too low if, after taking your diabetes medication, you eat less than usual (most of the body's glucose comes from food), or if you exercise more than you normally do, which uses extra glucose. Maintaining the balance between insulin, food and activity isn't always easy, but your doctor or diabetes educator can work with you to try to prevent low blood sugar levels.
Some people have a greater risk of diabetic hypoglycemia, including: People using insulin, People taking certain oral diabetes drugs (sulfonylureas), Young children and older adults, Those with impaired liver or kidney function, People who've had diabetes for a longer time, People who don't feel low blood sugar symptoms (hypoglycemia unawareness), Those taking multiple medications, Anyone with a disability that prevents a quick response to falling blood sugar levels, People who drink alcohol.
If you ignore the symptoms of hypoglycemia too long, you may lose consciousness. That's because your brain needs glucose to function. Recognize the signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia early, because if untreated, hypoglycemia can lead to: Seizures, Loss of consciousness, Death.
Take your early symptoms seriously. Diabetic hypoglycemia can increase the risk of serious — even deadly — accidents.
Diabetic ketoacidosis signs and symptoms often develop quickly, sometimes within 24 hours. For some, these signs and symptoms may be the first indication of having diabetes. You may notice: Excessive thirst, Frequent urination, Nausea and vomiting, Abdominal pain, Weakness or fatigue, Shortness of breath, Fruity-scented breath, Confusion.
More-specific signs of diabetic ketoacidosis — which can be detected through home blood and urine testing kits — include: High blood sugar level (hyperglycemia), High ketone levels in your urine.
If you feel ill or stressed or you've had a recent illness or injury, check your blood sugar level often. You might also try an over-the-counter urine ketones testing kit.
Contact your doctor immediately if: You're vomiting and unable to tolerate food or liquid, Your blood sugar level is higher than your target range and doesn't respond to home treatment, Your urine ketone level is moderate or high.
Seek emergency care if: Your blood sugar level is consistently higher than 300 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL), or 16.7 millimoles per liter (mmol/L), You have ketones in your urine and can't reach your doctor for advice, You have multiple signs and symptoms of diabetic ketoacidosis — excessive thirst, frequent urination, nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, shortness of breath, fruity-scented breath, confusion.
Remember, untreated diabetic ketoacidosis can be fatal.
Sugar is a main source of energy for the cells that make up your muscles and other tissues. Normally, insulin helps sugar enter your cells.
Without enough insulin, your body can't use sugar properly for energy. This prompts the release of hormones that break down fat as fuel, which produces acids known as ketones. Excess ketones build up in the blood and eventually "spill over" into the urine.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is usually triggered by:
An illness. An infection or other illness can cause your body to produce higher levels of certain hormones, such as adrenaline or cortisol. Unfortunately, these hormones counter the effect of insulin — sometimes triggering an episode of diabetic ketoacidosis. Pneumonia and urinary tract infections are common culprits.
A problem with insulin therapy. Missed insulin treatments or inadequate insulin therapy can leave you with too little insulin in your system, triggering diabetic ketoacidosis.
Other possible triggers of diabetic ketoacidosis include: Physical or emotional trauma, Heart attack, Alcohol or drug abuse, particularly cocaine, Certain medications, such as corticosteroids and some diuretics.
The risk of diabetic ketoacidosis is highest if you: Have type 1 diabetes, Frequently miss insulin doses.
Uncommonly, diabetic ketoacidosis can occur if you have type 2 diabetes. In some cases, diabetic ketoacidosis may be the first sign that a person has diabetes.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is treated with fluids, electrolytes — such as sodium, potassium and chloride — and insulin. Perhaps surprisingly, the most common complications of diabetic ketoacidosis are related to this lifesaving treatment.
Treatment complications include:
Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). Insulin allows sugar to enter your cells, causing your blood sugar level to drop. If your blood sugar level drops too quickly, you can develop low blood sugar.
Low potassium (hypokalemia). The fluids and insulin used to treat diabetic ketoacidosis can cause your potassium level to drop too low. A low potassium level can impair the activities of your heart, muscles and nerves.
Swelling in the brain (cerebral edema). Adjusting your blood sugar level too quickly can produce swelling in your brain. This complication appears to be more common in children, especially those with newly diagnosed diabetes.
Left untreated, the risks are much greater. Diabetic ketoacidosis can lead to loss of consciousness and, eventually, it can be fatal.
In the early stages of diabetic nephropathy, you may not notice any signs or symptoms. In later stages, the signs and symptoms include: Worsening blood pressure control, Protein in the urine, Swelling of feet, ankles, hands or eyes, Increased need to urinate, Reduced need for insulin or diabetes medicine, Confusion or difficulty concentrating, Shortness of breath, Loss of appetite, Nausea and vomiting, Persistent itching, Fatigue.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms of kidney disease.
If you have diabetes, visit your doctor yearly for a urine test that detects protein and a test to check the creatinine level in your blood. These help determine how well the kidneys are functioning.
Diabetic nephropathy results when diabetes damages blood vessels and other cells in your kidneys.
Your kidneys contain millions of tiny blood vessel clusters (glomeruli) that filter waste from your blood. Severe damage to these blood vessels can lead to diabetic nephropathy, decreased kidney function and kidney failure.
Diabetic nephropathy is a common complication of type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
Over time, poorly controlled diabetes can cause damage to blood vessel clusters in your kidneys that filter waste from your blood. This can lead to kidney damage and cause high blood pressure. High blood pressure can cause further kidney damage by increasing the pressure in the delicate filtering system of the kidneys.
Your risk of diabetic nephropathy is greater if you have type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Several other factors may increase your risk of diabetic nephropathy, including: High blood sugar (hyperglycemia) that's not well-controlled, High blood pressure (hypertension) that's not controlled, Being a smoker, High blood cholesterol, A family history of diabetes and kidney disease.
Complications of diabetic nephropathy may develop gradually over months or years. They may include: Fluid retention, which could lead to swelling in your arms and legs, high blood pressure, or fluid in your lungs (pulmonary edema), A rise in potassium levels in your blood (hyperkalemia), Heart and blood vessel disease (cardiovascular disease), possibly leading to stroke, Damage to the blood vessels of the retina (diabetic retinopathy), Anemia, Foot sores, erectile dysfunction, diarrhea and other problems related to damaged nerves and blood vessels, Pregnancy complications that carry risks for the mother and the developing fetus, Irreversible damage to your kidneys (end-stage kidney disease), eventually needing either dialysis or a kidney transplant for survival.
There are four main types of diabetic neuropathy. You can have one type or more than one type of neuropathy.
Your symptoms will depend on the type you have and which nerves are affected. Usually, symptoms develop gradually. You may not notice anything is wrong until considerable nerve damage has occurred.
This type of neuropathy may also be called distal symmetric peripheral neuropathy. It's the most common type of diabetic neuropathy. It affects the feet and legs first, followed by the hands and arms. Signs and symptoms of peripheral neuropathy are often worse at night, and may include: Numbness or reduced ability to feel pain or temperature changes, Tingling or burning sensation, Sharp pains or cramps, Increased sensitivity to touch — for some people, even a bedsheet's weight can be painful, Serious foot problems, such as ulcers, infections, and bone and joint pain.
The autonomic nervous system controls your heart, bladder, stomach, intestines, sex organs and eyes. Diabetes can affect nerves in any of these areas, possibly causing: A lack of awareness that blood sugar levels are low (hypoglycemia unawareness), Bladder or bowel problems, Slow stomach emptying (gastroparesis), causing nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite, Changes in the way your eyes adjust from light to dark, Decreased sexual response.
This type of neuropathy — also called diabetic amyotrophy — often affects nerves in the thighs, hips, buttocks or legs. It can also affect the abdominal and chest area. Symptoms are usually on one side of the body, but may spread to the other side. You may have: Severe pain in a hip and thigh or buttock, Eventual weak and shrinking thigh muscles, Difficulty rising from a sitting position, Severe stomach pain.
There are two types of mononeuropathy — cranial and peripheral. Mononeuropathy refers to damage to a specific nerve. Mononeuropathy may also lead to: Difficulty focusing or double vision, Aching behind one eye, Paralysis on one side of your face (Bell's palsy), Numbness or tingling in your hand or fingers, except your pinkie (little finger), Weakness in your hand that may cause you to drop things.
Call your doctor for an appointment if you have: A cut or sore on your foot that is infected or won't heal, Burning, tingling, weakness or pain in your hands or feet that interferes with daily activities or sleep, Changes in digestion, urination or sexual function, Dizziness and fainting.
The American Diabetes Association recommends that screening for diabetic neuropathy begin immediately after someone is diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, and five years after diagnosis for someone with type 1 diabetes. After that, screening is recommended annually.
The exact cause of each type of neuropathy is unknown. Researchers think that over time, uncontrolled high blood sugar damages nerves and interferes with their ability to send signals, leading to diabetic neuropathy. High blood sugar also weakens the walls of the small blood vessels (capillaries) that supply the nerves with oxygen and nutrients.
Anyone who has diabetes can develop neuropathy. But these risk factors make you more likely to get nerve damage:
Poor blood sugar control. Uncontrolled blood sugar puts you at risk of every diabetes complication, including nerve damage.
Diabetes history. Your risk of diabetic neuropathy increases the longer you have diabetes, especially if your blood sugar isn't well controlled.
Kidney disease. Diabetes can damage the kidneys. Kidney damage sends toxins into the blood, which can lead to nerve damage.
Being overweight. Having a body mass index (BMI) of 25 or more may increase your risk of diabetic neuropathy.
Smoking. Smoking narrows and hardens your arteries, reducing blood flow to your legs and feet. This makes it more difficult for wounds to heal and damages the peripheral nerves.
Diabetic neuropathy can cause a number of serious complications, including:
Hypoglycemia unawareness. Blood sugar levels below 70 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) normally cause shakiness, sweating and a fast heartbeat. But if you have autonomic neuropathy, you may not notice these warning signs.
Loss of a toe, foot or leg. Nerve damage can make you lose feeling in your feet, so even minor cuts can turn into sores or ulcers without your realizing it. In severe cases, an infection can spread to the bone or lead to tissue death. Removal (amputation) of a toe, foot or even the lower leg may be necessary.
Urinary tract infections and urinary incontinence. If the nerves that control your bladder are damaged, you may be unable to fully empty your bladder. Bacteria can build up in the bladder and kidneys, causing urinary tract infections. Nerve damage can also affect your ability to feel when you need to urinate or to control the muscles that release urine, leading to leakage (incontinence).
Sharp drops in blood pressure. Damage to the nerves that control blood flow can affect your body's ability to adjust blood pressure. This can cause a sharp drop in pressure when you stand after sitting, which may lead to dizziness and fainting.
Digestive problems. If nerve damage strikes your digestive tract, you can have constipation or diarrhea, or both. Diabetes-related nerve damage can lead to gastroparesis, a condition in which the stomach empties too slowly or not at all, which causes bloating and indigestion.
Sexual dysfunction. Autonomic neuropathy often damages the nerves that affect the sex organs. Men may experience erectile dysfunction. Women may have difficulty with lubrication and arousal.
Increased or decreased sweating. Nerve damage can disrupt how your sweat glands work and make it difficult for your body to control its temperature properly.
You might not have symptoms in the early stages of diabetic retinopathy. As the condition progresses, diabetic retinopathy symptoms may include: Spots or dark strings floating in your vision (floaters), Blurred vision, Fluctuating vision, Impaired color vision, Dark or empty areas in your vision, Vision loss.
Diabetic retinopathy usually affects both eyes.
Careful management of your diabetes is the best way to prevent vision loss. If you have diabetes, see your eye doctor for a yearly eye exam with dilation — even if your vision seems fine. Pregnancy may worsen diabetic retinopathy, so if you're pregnant, your eye doctor may recommend additional eye exams throughout your pregnancy.
Contact your eye doctor right away if your vision changes suddenly or becomes blurry, spotty or hazy.
Over time, too much sugar in your blood can lead to the blockage of the tiny blood vessels that nourish the retina, cutting off its blood supply. As a result, the eye attempts to grow new blood vessels. But these new blood vessels don't develop properly and can leak easily.
There are two types of diabetic retinopathy:
Early diabetic retinopathy. In this more common form — called nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) — new blood vessels aren't growing (proliferating).
When you have NPDR, the walls of the blood vessels in your retina weaken. Tiny bulges (microaneurysms) protrude from the vessel walls of the smaller vessels, sometimes leaking fluid and blood into the retina. Larger retinal vessels can begin to dilate and become irregular in diameter, as well. NPDR can progress from mild to severe, as more blood vessels become blocked.
Nerve fibers in the retina may begin to swell. Sometimes the central part of the retina (macula) begins to swell (macular edema), a condition that requires treatment.
Advanced diabetic retinopathy. Diabetic retinopathy can progress to this more severe type, known as proliferative diabetic retinopathy. In this type, damaged blood vessels close off, causing the growth of new, abnormal blood vessels in the retina, and can leak into the clear, jelly-like substance that fills the center of your eye (vitreous).
Eventually, scar tissue stimulated by the growth of new blood vessels may cause the retina to detach from the back of your eye. If the new blood vessels interfere with the normal flow of fluid out of the eye, pressure may build up in the eyeball. This can damage the nerve that carries images from your eye to your brain (optic nerve), resulting in glaucoma.
Anyone who has diabetes can develop diabetic retinopathy. Risk of developing the eye condition can increase as a result of: Duration of diabetes — the longer you have diabetes, the greater your risk of developing diabetic retinopathy, Poor control of your blood sugar level, High blood pressure, High cholesterol, Pregnancy, Tobacco use, Being African-American, Hispanic or Native American.
Diabetic retinopathy involves the abnormal growth of blood vessels in the retina. Complications can lead to serious vision problems:
Vitreous hemorrhage. The new blood vessels may bleed into the clear, jelly-like substance that fills the center of your eye. If the amount of bleeding is small, you might see only a few dark spots (floaters). In more-severe cases, blood can fill the vitreous cavity and completely block your vision.
Vitreous hemorrhage by itself usually doesn't cause permanent vision loss. The blood often clears from the eye within a few weeks or months. Unless your retina is damaged, your vision may return to its previous clarity.
Retinal detachment. The abnormal blood vessels associated with diabetic retinopathy stimulate the growth of scar tissue, which can pull the retina away from the back of the eye. This may cause spots floating in your vision, flashes of light or severe vision loss.
Glaucoma. New blood vessels may grow in the front part of your eye and interfere with the normal flow of fluid out of the eye, causing pressure in the eye to build up (glaucoma). This pressure can damage the nerve that carries images from your eye to your brain (optic nerve).
Blindness. Eventually, diabetic retinopathy, glaucoma or both can lead to complete vision loss.
Diaper rash is characterized by the following:
Skin signs. Diaper rash is marked by red, tender-looking skin in the diaper region — buttocks, thighs and genitals.
Changes in your baby's disposition. You may notice your baby seems more uncomfortable than usual, especially during diaper changes. A baby with a diaper rash often fusses or cries when the diaper area is washed or touched.
If your baby's skin doesn't improve after a few days of home treatment, talk with your doctor. Sometimes, you'll need a prescription medication to treat diaper rash.
Have your child examined if the rash: Is severe or unusual, Gets worse despite home treatment, Bleeds, itches or oozes, Causes burning or pain with urination or a bowel movement, Is accompanied by a fever.
Diaper rash can be traced to a number of sources, including:
Irritation from stool and urine. Prolonged exposure to urine or stool can irritate a baby's sensitive skin. Your baby may be more prone to diaper rash if he or she is experiencing frequent bowel movements or diarrhea because feces are more irritating than urine.
Chafing or rubbing. Tightfitting diapers or clothing that rubs against the skin can lead to a rash.
Irritation from a new product. Your baby's skin may react to baby wipes, a new brand of disposable diapers, or a detergent, bleach or fabric softener used to launder cloth diapers. Other substances that can add to the problem include ingredients found in some baby lotions, powders and oils.
Bacterial or yeast (fungal) infection. What begins as a simple skin infection may spread to the surrounding region. The area covered by a diaper — buttocks, thighs and genitals — is especially vulnerable because it's warm and moist, making a perfect breeding ground for bacteria and yeast. These rashes can be found within the creases of the skin, and there may be red dots scattered around the creases.
Introduction of new foods. As babies start to eat solid foods, the content of their stool changes. This increases the likelihood of diaper rash. Changes in your baby's diet can also increase the frequency of stools, which can lead to diaper rash. If your baby is breast-fed, he or she may develop diaper rash in response to something the mother has eaten.
Sensitive skin. Babies with skin conditions, such as atopic dermatitis or seborrheic dermatitis (eczema), may be more likely to develop diaper rash. However, the irritated skin of atopic dermatitis and eczema primarily affects areas other than the diaper area.
Use of antibiotics. Antibiotics kill bacteria — the good kinds as well as the bad. When a baby takes antibiotics, bacteria that keep yeast growth in check may be depleted, resulting in diaper rash due to yeast infection. Antibiotic use also increases the risk of diarrhea. Breast-fed babies whose mothers take antibiotics are also at increased risk of diaper rash.
Signs and symptoms associated with diarrhea may include: Loose, watery stools, Abdominal cramps, Abdominal pain, Fever, Blood in the stool, Mucus in the stool, Bloating, Nausea, Urgent need to have a bowel movement.
If you're an adult, see your doctor if: Your diarrhea persists beyond a few days, You become dehydrated, You have severe abdominal or rectal pain, You have bloody or black stools, You have a fever above 102 F (39 C).
In children, particularly young children, diarrhea can quickly lead to dehydration. Call your doctor if your child's diarrhea doesn't improve within 24 hours or if your baby: Becomes dehydrated, Has a fever above 102 F (39 C), Has bloody or black stools.
A number of diseases and conditions can cause diarrhea, including
Viruses. Viruses that can cause diarrhea include Norwalk virus, cytomegalovirus and viral hepatitis. Rotavirus is a common cause of acute childhood diarrhea. The virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has also been associated with gastrointestinal symptoms, including nausea, vomiting and diarrhea.
Bacteria and parasites. Contaminated food or water can transmit bacteria and parasites to your body. When traveling in developing countries, diarrhea caused by bacteria and parasites is often called traveler's diarrhea. Clostridium difficile is another type of bacteria that can cause serious infections that cause diarrhea, and it can occur after a course of antibiotics or during a hospitalization.
Medications. Many medications, such as antibiotics, can cause diarrhea. Antibiotics destroy both good and bad bacteria, which can disturb the natural balance of bacteria in your intestines. Other drugs that cause diarrhea are cancer drugs and antacids with magnesium.
Lactose intolerance. Lactose is a sugar found in milk and other dairy products. People who have difficulty digesting lactose have diarrhea after eating dairy products. Lactose intolerance can increase with age because levels of the enzyme that helps digest lactose drop after childhood.
Fructose. Fructose is a sugar found naturally in fruits and honey. It's sometimes added as a sweetener to certain beverages. In people who have trouble digesting fructose, it can lead to diarrhea.
Artificial sweeteners. Sorbitol and mannitol — artificial sweeteners found in chewing gum and other sugar-free products — can cause diarrhea in some otherwise healthy people.
Surgery. Abdominal or gallbladder removal surgeries can sometimes cause diarrhea.
Other digestive disorders. Chronic diarrhea has a number of other causes, such as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, celiac disease, microscopic colitis and irritable bowel syndrome.
Diarrhea can cause dehydration, which can be life-threatening if untreated. Dehydration is particularly dangerous in children, older adults and those with weakened immune systems.
If you have signs of serious dehydration, seek medical help.
These include: Excessive thirst, Dry mouth or skin, Little or no urination, Weakness, dizziness or lightheadedness, Fatigue, Dark-colored urine.
These include: Not having a wet diaper in three or more hours, Dry mouth and tongue, Fever above 102 F (39 C), Crying without tears, Drowsiness, unresponsiveness or irritability, Sunken appearance to the abdomen, eyes or cheeks.
You might have no signs or symptoms with DISH. For those who have signs and symptoms, the upper portion of the back is most commonly affected. Signs and symptoms might include:
Stiffness. Stiffness may be most noticeable in the morning.
Pain. You might feel pain in your back or in other affected areas, such as your shoulder, elbow, knee or heel.
Loss of range of motion. You might notice this most when stretching side to side.
Difficulty swallowing or a hoarse voice. You might have these if you have DISH in your neck.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have persistent pain or stiffness in any joint or in your back.
DISH is caused by the buildup of calcium salts in the ligaments and tendons and a hardening and overgrowth of bone. But what causes these to occur is unknown.
Doctors have some idea of what can increase your risk of the condition. Risk factors include:
Sex. Men are more likely to develop DISH.
Older age. DISH is most common in older adults, especially in people older than 50.
Diabetes and other conditions. People with type 2 diabetes might be more likely to develop DISH than are those who don't have diabetes. Other conditions that can raise insulin levels in your body may also increase your risk, including hyperinsulinemia, prediabetes and obesity.
Certain medications. Long-term use of medications called retinoids, such as isotretinoin (Amnesteem, Claravis, others), which are used to treat skin conditions such as acne, can increase your risk.
People with DISH are at risk of certain complications, such as:
Disability. Loss of range of motion in the affected joint can make it difficult to use that joint. For instance, DISH in your shoulder can make it difficult to use your arm.
Difficulty swallowing. Bone spurs in the neck can put pressure on your esophagus. The pressure from bone spurs can also cause a hoarse voice or sleep apnea, a sleep disorder in which you stop breathing repeatedly during sleep. Rarely, this can become serious and might require surgery to remove the bone spurs.
Spinal fracture. DISH can increase your risk of breaking bones in your spine, especially if you have moderate to severe disease. Even minor injuries can cause fractures. Breaks might require surgery to repair.
Signs and symptoms of DiGeorge syndrome (22q11.2 deletion syndrome) can vary in type and severity, depending on what body systems are affected and how severe the defects are. Some signs and symptoms may be apparent at birth, but others may not appear until later in infancy or early childhood.
Signs and symptoms may include some combination of the following: Heart murmur and bluish skin due to poor circulation of oxygen-rich blood (cyanosis) as a result of a heart defect, Frequent infections, Certain facial features, such as an underdeveloped chin, low-set ears, wide-set eyes or a narrow groove in the upper lip, A gap in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) or other problems with the palate, Delayed growth, Difficulty feeding, failure to gain weight or gastrointestinal problems, Breathing problems, Poor muscle tone, Delayed development, such as delays in rolling over, sitting up or other infant milestones, Delayed speech development or nasal-sounding speech, Learning delays or disabilities, Behavior problems.
Other conditions may cause signs and symptoms similar to 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. So it's important to get an accurate and prompt diagnosis if your child shows any signs or symptoms listed above.
Doctors may suspect 22q11.2 deletion syndrome:
At birth. If certain conditions — a severe heart defect, cleft palate or a combination of other factors typical of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome — are readily apparent at birth, diagnostic tests will likely begin before your child leaves the hospital.
At well-baby visits. Your family doctor or pediatrician may suspect the disorder because of a combination of illnesses or disorders that become apparent over time. Other issues may come to the attention of your doctor during regularly scheduled well-baby visits or annual checkups for your child.
Each person has two copies of chromosome 22, one inherited from each parent. If a person has DiGeorge syndrome (22q11.2 deletion syndrome), one copy of chromosome 22 is missing a segment that includes an estimated 30 to 40 genes. Many of these genes haven't been clearly identified and aren't well-understood. The region of chromosome 22 that's deleted is known as 22q11.2.
The deletion of genes from chromosome 22 usually occurs as a random event in the father's sperm or in the mother's egg, or it may occur early during fetal development. Rarely, the deletion is an inherited condition passed to a child from a parent who also has deletions in chromosome 22 but may or may not have symptoms.
The portions of chromosome 22 deleted in DiGeorge syndrome (22q11.2 deletion syndrome) play a role in the development of a number of body systems. As a result, the disorder can cause several errors during fetal development. Common problems that occur with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome include:
Heart defects. 22q11.2 deletion syndrome often causes heart defects that could result in an insufficient supply of oxygen-rich blood. For example, defects may include a hole between the lower chambers of the heart (ventricular septal defect); only one large vessel, rather than two vessels, leading out of the heart (truncus arteriosus); or a combination of four abnormal heart structures (tetralogy of Fallot).
Hypoparathyroidism. The four parathyroid glands in the neck regulate the levels of calcium and phosphorus in the body. 22q11.2 deletion syndrome can cause smaller than normal parathyroid glands that secrete too little parathyroid hormone (PTH), leading to hypoparathyroidism. This condition results in low levels of calcium and high levels of phosphorus in the blood.
Thymus gland dysfunction. The thymus gland, located beneath the breastbone, is where T cells — a type of white blood cell — mature. Mature T cells are needed to help fight infections. In children with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, the thymus gland may be small or missing, resulting in poor immune function and frequent, severe infections.
Cleft palate. A common condition of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is a cleft palate — an opening (cleft) in the roof of the mouth (palate) — with or without a cleft lip. Other, less visible abnormalities of the palate that may also be present can make it difficult to swallow or produce certain sounds in speech.
Distinct facial features. A number of particular facial features may be present in some people with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. These may include small, low-set ears, short width of eye openings (palpebral fissures), hooded eyes, a relatively long face, an enlarged nose tip (bulbous), or a short or flattened groove in the upper lip.
Learning, behavioral and mental health problems. 22q11.2 deletion may cause problems with development and function of the brain, resulting in learning, social, developmental or behavioral problems. Delays in toddler speech development and learning difficulties are common. Some children develop attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or autism spectrum disorder. Later in life, the risk of depression, anxiety disorders and other mental health disorders increases.
Autoimmune disorders. People who had poor immune function as children, due to a small or missing thymus, may also have an increased risk of autoimmune disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis or Graves' disease.
Other problems. A large number of medical conditions may be associated with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, such as hearing impairment, poor vision, breathing problems, poor kidney function and relatively short stature for one's family.
If you have dilated cardiomyopathy, you're likely to have signs and symptoms of heart failure or arrhythmias caused by your condition. Signs and symptoms include: Fatigue, Shortness of breath (dyspnea) when you're active or lying down, Reduced ability to exercise, Swelling (edema) in your legs, ankles and feet, Swelling of your abdomen due to fluid buildup (ascites), Chest pain, Extra or unusual sounds heard when your heart beats (heart murmurs).
If you're short of breath or have other symptoms of dilated cardiomyopathy, see your doctor as soon as possible. Call 911 or your local emergency number if you feel chest pain that lasts more than a few minutes or have severe difficulty breathing.
If a family member has dilated cardiomyopathy, talk to your doctor about being screened or having family members screened for the condition. Early detection using genetic testing may benefit people with inherited forms of dilated cardiomyopathy who have no apparent signs or symptoms.
The cause of dilated cardiomyopathy often can't be determined. However, numerous factors can cause the left ventricle to dilate and weaken, including: Diabetes, Obesity, High blood pressure (hypertension), Alcohol abuse, Certain cancer medications, Cocaine use and abuse, Infections, including those caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites, Exposure to toxins, such as lead, mercury and cobalt, Arrhythmias, Complications of late-stage pregnancy.
Dilated cardiomyopathy most commonly occurs in men, ages 20 to 50. But it can also occur in women. Other risk factors include: Damage to the heart muscle from a heart attack, Family history of dilated cardiomyopathy, Inflammation of heart muscle from immune system disorders, such as lupus, Neuromuscular disorders, such as muscular dystrophy.
Complications from dilated cardiomyopathy include:
Heart failure. Poor blood flow from the left ventricle can lead to heart failure. Your heart might not be able to supply your body with the blood it needs to function properly.
Heart valve regurgitation. Enlargement of the left ventricle may make it harder for your heart valves to close, causing a backward flow of blood and making your heart pump less effectively.
Fluid buildup (edema). Fluid can build up in the lungs, abdomen, legs and feet (edema).
Abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias). Changes in your heart's structure and changes in pressure on your heart's chambers can contribute to the development of arrhythmias.
Sudden cardiac arrest. Dilated cardiomyopathy can cause your heart to suddenly stop beating.
Blood clots (emboli). Pooling of blood (stasis) in the left ventricle can lead to blood clots, which may enter the bloodstream, cut off the blood supply to vital organs, and cause stroke, heart attack or damage to other organs. Arrhythmias can also cause blood clots.
Diphtheria signs and symptoms usually begin two to five days after a person becomes infected and may include: A thick, gray membrane covering your throat and tonsils, A sore throat and hoarseness, Swollen glands (enlarged lymph nodes) in your neck, Difficulty breathing or rapid breathing, Nasal discharge, Fever and chills, Malaise.
In some people, infection with diphtheria-causing bacteria causes only a mild illness — or no obvious signs and symptoms at all. Infected people who remain unaware of their illness are known as carriers of diphtheria, because they can spread the infection without being sick themselves.
A second type of diphtheria can affect the skin, causing pain, redness and swelling similar to other bacterial skin infections. Ulcers covered by a gray membrane also may be skin diphtheria.
Although it's more common in tropical climates, diphtheria on the skin also occurs in the United States, particularly among people with poor hygiene who live in crowded conditions.
Call your family doctor immediately if you or your child has been exposed to someone with diphtheria. If you're not sure whether your child has been vaccinated against diphtheria, schedule an appointment. Make sure your own vaccinations are current.
Diphtheria is caused by the bacterium Corynebacterium diphtheriae. The bacterium usually multiplies on or near the surface of the throat. C. diphtheriae spreads via:
Airborne droplets. When an infected person's sneeze or cough releases a mist of contaminated droplets, people nearby may inhale C. diphtheriae. Diphtheria spreads easily this way, especially in crowded conditions.
Contaminated personal or household items. People occasionally catch diphtheria from handling an infected person's things, such as used tissues or hand towels, that may be contaminated with the bacteria.  You can also transfer diphtheria-causing bacteria by touching an infected wound.
People who have been infected by the diphtheria bacteria and who haven't been treated can infect people who haven't had the diphtheria vaccine — even if they don't show any symptoms.
People who are at increased risk of contracting diphtheria include: Children and adults who don't have up-to-date vaccinations, People living in crowded or unsanitary conditions, Anyone who travels to an area where diphtheria infections are more common.
Diphtheria rarely occurs in the United States and Western Europe, where children have been vaccinated against the condition for decades. However, diphtheria is still common in developing countries where vaccination rates are low.
In areas where diphtheria vaccination is standard, the disease is mainly a threat to unvaccinated or inadequately vaccinated people who travel internationally or have contact with people from less-developed countries.
Left untreated, diphtheria can lead to:
Breathing problems. Diphtheria-causing bacteria may produce a toxin. This toxin damages tissue in the immediate area of infection — usually, the nose and throat. At that site, the infection produces a tough, gray-colored membrane composed of dead cells, bacteria and other substances. This membrane can obstruct breathing.
Heart damage. The diphtheria toxin may spread through your bloodstream and damage other tissues in your body, such as your heart muscle, causing such complications as inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis). Heart damage from myocarditis may be slight or severe. At its worst, myocarditis can lead to congestive heart failure and sudden death.
Nerve damage. The toxin can also cause nerve damage. Typical targets are nerves to the throat, where poor nerve conduction may cause difficulty swallowing. Nerves to the arms and legs also may become inflamed, causing muscle weakness. 
If the diphtheria toxin damages the nerves that help control muscles used in breathing, these muscles may become paralyzed. At that point, you might need mechanical assistance to breathe.
With treatment, most people with diphtheria survive these complications, but recovery is often slow. Diphtheria is fatal 5% to 10% of the time, according to the World Health Organization. Rates of death are higher in children.
Signs and symptoms of a dislocated elbow include: Extreme pain, Obvious distortion of the joint.
Toddlers with nursemaid's elbow might experience pain only when the affected elbow is moved. A child often avoids using the arm and holds it slightly flexed next to the body.
Sometimes, the elbow is only partially dislocated. Partial dislocation can cause bruising and pain where the ligaments were stretched or torn.
Seek immediate medical attention if you or your child has extreme pain or obvious distortion of the elbow joint.
In adults, the most common causes of a dislocated elbow include:
Falls. Falling onto an outstretched hand can pop the upper arm bone out of alignment within the elbow joint.
Motor vehicle accidents. The same type of impact can occur when passengers in motor vehicle accidents reach forward to brace themselves before a collision.
In children or teenagers, falling onto an outstretched hand is also a common cause of a dislocated elbow.
In toddlers, the injury often occurs when an extra pulling motion is applied to an outstretched arm. The causes of such injuries include:
Improper lifting. Trying to lift or swing a young child by the arms can cause the elbow to dislocate.
Sudden pulling. Having the child suddenly step off a curb or stairstep as you're holding his or her hand can pull the elbow out of alignment.
Age. Young children's elbows are much more flexible than those of adults. So it's easier for younger elbows to become dislocated.
Heredity. Some people are born with elbow ligaments that are looser than those of most people.
Sports participation. Many elbow dislocations are sports-related. Sports that require weight bearing with the arms, such as gymnastics floor exercise, are especially risky for elbow dislocations.
Complications of a dislocated elbow can include:
Fracture. The force that dislocates the elbow might also cause a fracture in one of the elbow bones.
Pinched nerves. Rarely, nerves that travel across the elbow can become pinched or trapped between the dislocated bones or within the joint when the bones are realigned. Pinched nerves can cause numbness in the arm and hand.
Trapped arteries. Rarely, blood vessels that supply the arm and hand can become pinched or trapped between the dislocated bones or within the realigned joint. Lack of blood supply can cause severe pain and permanent tissue damage in the arm and hand.
Avulsion fractures. In some elbow dislocations, a stretched ligament will pull off a tiny bit of bone from its attachment point. This type of damage is more common in children.
Osteoarthritis. The dislocated joint may be at higher risk of developing osteoarthritis in the future.
Dislocated shoulder signs and symptoms may include: A visibly deformed or out-of-place shoulder, Swelling or bruising, Intense pain, Inability to move the joint.
Shoulder dislocation may also cause numbness, weakness or tingling near the injury, such as in your neck or down your arm. The muscles in your shoulder may spasm from the disruption, often increasing the intensity of your pain.
Get medical help right away for a shoulder that appears dislocated.
While you're waiting for medical attention:
Don't move the joint. Splint or sling the shoulder joint in its current position. Don't try to move the shoulder or force it back into place. This can damage the shoulder joint and its surrounding muscles, ligaments, nerves or blood vessels.
Ice the injured joint. Applying ice to your shoulder can help reduce pain and swelling by controlling internal bleeding and the buildup of fluids in and around your shoulder joint.
The shoulder joint is the most frequently dislocated joint of the body. Because it moves in several directions, your shoulder can dislocate forward, backward or downward, completely or partially, though most dislocations occur through the front of the shoulder. In addition, fibrous tissue that joins the bones of your shoulder can be stretched or torn, often complicating the dislocation.
It takes a strong force, such as a sudden blow to your shoulder, to pull the bones out of place. Extreme rotation of your shoulder joint can pop the ball of your upper arm bone out of your shoulder socket. Partial dislocation — in which your upper arm bone is partially in and partially out of your shoulder socket — also may occur.
A dislocated shoulder may be caused by:
Sports injuries. Shoulder dislocation is a common injury in contact sports, such as football and hockey, and in sports that may involve falls, such as downhill skiing, gymnastics and volleyball.
Trauma not related to sports. A hard blow to your shoulder during a motor vehicle accident is a common source of dislocation.
Falls. You may dislocate your shoulder during a fall, such as from a ladder or from tripping on a loose rug.
Males in their teens or 20s, a group that tends to be physically active, are at highest risk of shoulder dislocation.
Complications of a dislocated shoulder may include: Tearing of the muscles, ligaments and tendons that reinforce your shoulder joint, Nerve or blood vessel damage in or around your shoulder joint, Shoulder instability, especially if you have a severe dislocation or repeated dislocations, which makes you more prone to re-injury..
If you stretch or tear ligaments or tendons in your shoulder or damage nerves or blood vessels around your shoulder joint, you may need surgery to repair these tissues.
A dislocated joint can be: Visibly deformed or out of place, Swollen or discolored, Intensely painful, Immovable.
It can be difficult to tell a broken bone from a dislocated bone. For either type of injury, get medical help right away. If possible, ice the joint and keep it immobile while you're waiting to be seen.
Dislocations can occur in contact sports, such as football and hockey, and in sports in which falls are common, such as downhill skiing, gymnastics and volleyball. Basketball players and football players also commonly dislocate joints in their fingers and hands by accidentally striking the ball, the ground or another player.
A hard blow to a joint during a motor vehicle accident and landing on an outstretched arm during a fall are other common causes.
Risk factors for a joint dislocation include:
Susceptibility to falls. Falling increases your chances of a dislocated joint if you use your arms to brace for impact or if you land forcefully on a body part, such as your hip or shoulder.
Heredity. Some people are born with ligaments that are looser and more prone to injury than those of other people.
Sports participation. Many dislocations occur during high-impact or contact sports, such as gymnastics, wrestling, basketball and football.
Motor vehicle accidents. These are the most common cause of hip dislocations, especially for people not wearing a seat belt.
Complications of a joint dislocation can include: Tearing of the muscles, ligaments and tendons that reinforce the injured joint, Nerve or blood vessel damage in or around your joint, Susceptibility to reinjury if you have a severe dislocation or repeated dislocations, Development of arthritis in the affected joint as you age.
Stretching or tearing of ligaments or tendons that support your injured joint or damage to nerves or blood vessels surrounding the joint might require surgery to repair these tissues.
Signs and symptoms depend on the type of dissociative disorders you have, but may include: Memory loss (amnesia) of certain time periods, events, people and personal information, A sense of being detached from yourself and your emotions, A perception of the people and things around you as distorted and unreal, A blurred sense of identity, Significant stress or problems in your relationships, work or other important areas of your life, Inability to cope well with emotional or professional stress, Mental health problems, such as depression, anxiety, and suicidal thoughts and behaviors.
There are three major dissociative disorders defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association:
Dissociative amnesia. The main symptom is memory loss that's more severe than normal forgetfulness and that can't be explained by a medical condition. You can't recall information about yourself or events and people in your life, especially from a traumatic time. Dissociative amnesia can be specific to events in a certain time, such as intense combat, or more rarely, can involve complete loss of memory about yourself. It may sometimes involve travel or confused wandering away from your life (dissociative fugue). An episode of amnesia usually occurs suddenly and may last minutes, hours, or rarely, months or years.
Dissociative identity disorder. Formerly known as multiple personality disorder, this disorder is characterized by "switching" to alternate identities. You may feel the presence of two or more people talking or living inside your head, and you may feel as though you're possessed by other identities. Each identity may have a unique name, personal history and characteristics, including obvious differences in voice, gender, mannerisms and even such physical qualities as the need for eyeglasses. There also are differences in how familiar each identity is with the others. People with dissociative identity disorder typically also have dissociative amnesia and often have dissociative fugue.
Depersonalization-derealization disorder. This involves an ongoing or episodic sense of detachment or being outside yourself — observing your actions, feelings, thoughts and self from a distance as though watching a movie (depersonalization). Other people and things around you may feel detached and foggy or dreamlike, time may be slowed down or sped up, and the world may seem unreal (derealization). You may experience depersonalization, derealization or both. Symptoms, which can be profoundly distressing, may last only a few moments or come and go over many years.
Some people with dissociative disorders present in a crisis with traumatic flashbacks that are overwhelming or associated with unsafe behavior. People with these symptoms should be seen in an emergency room.
If you or a loved one has less urgent symptoms that may indicate a dissociative disorder, call your doctor.
If you have thoughts of hurting yourself or someone else, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately, go to an emergency room, or confide in a trusted relative or friend. Or call a suicide hotline number — in the United States, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) to reach a trained counselor.
Dissociative disorders usually develop as a way to cope with trauma. The disorders most often form in children subjected to long-term physical, sexual or emotional abuse or, less often, a home environment that's frightening or highly unpredictable. The stress of war or natural disasters also can bring on dissociative disorders.
Personal identity is still forming during childhood. So a child is more able than an adult to step outside of himself or herself and observe trauma as though it's happening to a different person. A child who learns to dissociate in order to endure a traumatic experience may use this coping mechanism in response to stressful situations throughout life.
People who experience long-term physical, sexual or emotional abuse during childhood are at greatest risk of developing dissociative disorders.
Children and adults who experience other traumatic events, such as war, natural disasters, kidnapping, torture, or extended, traumatic, early-life medical procedures, also may develop these conditions.
People with dissociative disorders are at increased risk of complications and associated disorders, such as: Self-harm or mutilation, Suicidal thoughts and behavior, Sexual dysfunction, Alcoholism and drug use disorders, Depression and anxiety disorders, Post-traumatic stress disorder, Personality disorders, Sleep disorders, including nightmares, insomnia and sleepwalking, Eating disorders, Physical symptoms such as lightheadedness or non-epileptic seizures, Major difficulties in personal relationships and at work.
The signs and symptoms of diverticulitis include:
Pain, which may be constant and persist for several days. The lower left side of the abdomen is the usual site of the pain. Sometimes, however, the right side of the abdomen is more painful, especially in people of Asian descent.
Nausea and vomiting.
Fever.
Abdominal tenderness.
Constipation or, less commonly, diarrhea.
Get medical attention anytime you have constant, unexplained abdominal pain, particularly if you also have a fever and constipation or diarrhea.
Diverticula usually develop when naturally weak places in your colon give way under pressure. This causes marble-sized pouches to protrude through the colon wall.
Diverticulitis occurs when diverticula tear, resulting in inflammation, and in some cases, infection.
Several factors may increase your risk of developing diverticulitis:
Aging. The incidence of diverticulitis increases with age.
Obesity. Being seriously overweight increases your odds of developing diverticulitis.
Smoking. People who smoke cigarettes are more likely than nonsmokers to experience diverticulitis.
Lack of exercise. Vigorous exercise appears to lower your risk of diverticulitis.
Diet high in animal fat and low in fiber. A low-fiber diet in combination with a high intake of animal fat seems to increase risk, although the role of low fiber alone isn't clear.
Certain medications. Several drugs are associated with an increased risk of diverticulitis, including steroids, opioids and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve).
About 25% of people with acute diverticulitis develop complications, which may include:
An abscess, which occurs when pus collects in the pouch.
A blockage in your bowel caused by scarring.
An abnormal passageway (fistula) between sections of bowel or the bowel and other organs.
Peritonitis, which can occur if the infected or inflamed pouch ruptures, spilling intestinal contents into your abdominal cavity. Peritonitis is a medical emergency and requires immediate care.
People experiencing dizziness may describe it as any of a number of sensations, such as: A false sense of motion or spinning (vertigo), Lightheadedness or feeling faint, Unsteadiness or a loss of balance, A feeling of floating, wooziness or heavy-headedness.
These feelings may be triggered or worsened by walking, standing up or moving your head. Your dizziness may be accompanied by nausea or be so sudden or severe that you need to sit or lie down. The episode may last seconds or days and may recur.
Generally, see your doctor if you experience any recurrent, sudden, severe, or prolonged and unexplained dizziness or vertigo.
Get emergency medical care if you experience new, severe dizziness or vertigo along with any of the following: Sudden, severe headache, Chest pain, Difficulty breathing, Numbness or paralysis of arms or legs, Fainting, Double vision, Rapid or irregular heartbeat, Confusion or slurred speech, Stumbling or difficulty walking, Ongoing vomiting, Seizures, A sudden change in hearing, Facial numbness or weakness.
Dizziness has many possible causes, including inner ear disturbance, motion sickness and medication effects. Sometimes it's caused by an underlying health condition, such as poor circulation, infection or injury.
The way dizziness makes you feel and your triggers provide clues for possible causes. How long the dizziness lasts and any other symptoms you have also help pinpoint the cause.
Your sense of balance depends on the combined input from the various parts of your sensory system. These include your: Eyes, which help you determine where your body is in space and how it's moving, Sensory nerves, which send messages to your brain about body movements and positions, Inner ear, which houses sensors that help detect gravity and back-and-forth motion.
Vertigo is the false sense that your surroundings are spinning or moving. With inner ear disorders, your brain receives signals from the inner ear that aren't consistent with what your eyes and sensory nerves are receiving. Vertigo is what results as your brain works to sort out the confusion.
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). This condition causes an intense and brief but false sense that you're spinning or moving. These episodes are triggered by a rapid change in head movement, such as when you turn over in bed,  sit up or experience a blow to the head. BPPV is the most common cause of vertigo.
Infection. A viral infection of the vestibular nerve, called vestibular neuritis, can cause intense, constant vertigo. If you also have sudden hearing loss, you may have labyrinthitis.
Meniere's disease. This disease involves the excessive buildup of fluid in your inner ear. It's characterized by sudden episodes of vertigo lasting as long as several hours. You may also experience fluctuating hearing loss, ringing in the ear and the feeling of a plugged ear.
Migraine. People who experience migraines may have episodes of vertigo or other types of dizziness even when they're not having a severe headache. Such vertigo episodes can last minutes to hours and may be associated with headache as well as light and noise sensitivity.
You may feel dizzy, faint or off balance if your heart isn't pumping enough blood to your brain. Causes include:
Drop in blood pressure. A dramatic drop in your systolic blood pressure — the higher number in your blood pressure reading — may result in brief lightheadedness or a feeling of faintness. It can occur after sitting up or standing too quickly. This condition is also called orthostatic hypotension.
Poor blood circulation. Conditions such as cardiomyopathy, heart attack, heart arrhythmia and transient ischemic attack could cause dizziness. And a decrease in blood volume may cause inadequate blood flow to your brain or inner ear.
Neurological conditions. Some neurological disorders — such as Parkinson's disease and multiple sclerosis — can lead to progressive loss of balance.
Medications. Dizziness can be a side effect of certain medications — such as anti-seizure drugs, antidepressants, sedatives and tranquilizers. In particular, blood pressure lowering medications may cause faintness if they lower your blood pressure too much.
Anxiety disorders. Certain anxiety disorders may cause lightheadedness or a woozy feeling often referred to as dizziness. These include panic attacks and a fear of leaving home or being in large, open spaces (agoraphobia).
Low iron levels (anemia). Other signs and symptoms that may occur along with dizziness if you have anemia include fatigue, weakness and pale skin.
Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). This condition generally occurs in people with diabetes who use insulin. Dizziness (lightheadedness) may be accompanied by sweating and anxiety.
Carbon monoxide poisoning. Symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning are often described as "flu-like" and include headache, dizziness, weakness, upset stomach, vomiting, chest pain and confusion.
Overheating and dehydration. If you're active in hot weather or if you don't drink enough fluids, you may feel dizzy from overheating (hyperthermia) or from dehydration. This is especially true if you take certain heart medications.
Factors that may increase your risk of getting dizzy include:
Age. Older adults are more likely to have medical conditions that cause dizziness, especially a sense of imbalance. They're also more likely to take medications that can cause dizziness.
A past episode of dizziness. If you've experienced dizziness before, you're more likely to get dizzy in the future.
Dizziness can increase your risk of falling and injuring yourself. Experiencing dizziness while driving a car or operating heavy machinery can increase the likelihood of an accident. You may also experience long-term consequences if an existing health condition that may be causing your dizziness goes untreated.
A double uterus often causes no symptoms. The condition may be discovered during a regular pelvic exam or during imaging tests to determine the cause of repeated miscarriages.
Women who have a double vagina along with a double uterus may initially consult a doctor for menstrual bleeding that isn't stopped by a tampon. In these situations, the woman has placed a tampon in one vagina, but blood is still escaping from the second uterus and vagina.
Seek medical advice if you have a menstrual flow despite the insertion of a tampon, or if you have severe pain with menstruation or experience repeated miscarriages.
Doctors aren't certain why some fetuses develop a double uterus and others don't. A genetic component may be a factor because this rare condition sometimes runs in families.
Many women with a double uterus have normal sex lives, pregnancies and deliveries. But sometimes a double uterus and other abnormalities of uterine development are associated with: Infertility, Miscarriage, Premature birth, Kidney abnormalities.
Each person with Down syndrome is an individual — intellectual and developmental problems may be mild, moderate or severe. Some people are healthy while others have significant health problems such as serious heart defects.
Children and adults with Down syndrome have distinct facial features. Though not all people with Down syndrome have the same features, some of the more common features include: Flattened face, Small head, Short neck, Protruding tongue, Upward slanting eye lids (palpebral fissures), Unusually shaped or small ears, Poor muscle tone, Broad, short hands with a single crease in the palm, Relatively short fingers and small hands and feet, Excessive flexibility, Tiny white spots on the colored part (iris) of the eye called Brushfield's spots, Short height.
Infants with Down syndrome may be average size, but typically they grow slowly and remain shorter than other children the same age.
Most children with Down syndrome have mild to moderate cognitive impairment. Language is delayed, and both short and long-term memory is affected.
Children with Down syndrome usually are diagnosed before or at birth. However, if you have any questions regarding your pregnancy or your child's growth and development, talk with your doctor.
Human cells normally contain 23 pairs of chromosomes. One chromosome in each pair comes from your father, the other from your mother.
Down syndrome results when abnormal cell division involving chromosome 21 occurs. These cell division abnormalities result in an extra partial or full chromosome 21. This extra genetic material is responsible for the characteristic features and developmental problems of Down syndrome. Any one of three genetic variations can cause Down syndrome:
Trisomy 21. About 95 percent of the time, Down syndrome is caused by trisomy 21 — the person has three copies of chromosome 21, instead of the usual two copies, in all cells. This is caused by abnormal cell division during the development of the sperm cell or the egg cell.
Mosaic Down syndrome. In this rare form of Down syndrome, a person has only some cells with an extra copy of chromosome 21. This mosaic of normal and abnormal cells is caused by abnormal cell division after fertilization.
Translocation Down syndrome. Down syndrome can also occur when a portion of chromosome 21 becomes attached (translocated) onto another chromosome, before or at conception. These children have the usual two copies of chromosome 21, but they also have additional genetic material from chromosome 21 attached to another chromosome.
There are no known behavioral or environmental factors that cause Down syndrome.
Most of the time, Down syndrome isn't inherited. It's caused by a mistake in cell division during early development of the fetus.
Translocation Down syndrome can be passed from parent to child. However, only about 3 to 4 percent of children with Down syndrome have translocation and only some of them inherited it from one of their parents.
When balanced translocations are inherited, the mother or father has some rearranged genetic material from chromosome 21 on another chromosome, but no extra genetic material. This means he or she has no signs or symptoms of Down syndrome, but can pass an unbalanced translocation on to children, causing Down syndrome in the children.
Some parents have a greater risk of having a baby with Down syndrome. Risk factors include:
Advancing maternal age. A woman's chances of giving birth to a child with Down syndrome increase with age because older eggs have a greater risk of improper chromosome division. A woman's risk of conceiving a child with Down syndrome increases after 35 years of age. However, most children with Down syndrome are born to women under age 35 because younger women have far more babies.
Being carriers of the genetic translocation for Down syndrome. Both men and women can pass the genetic translocation for Down syndrome on to their children.
Having had one child with Down syndrome. Parents who have one child with Down syndrome and parents who have a translocation themselves are at an increased risk of having another child with Down syndrome. A genetic counselor can help parents assess the risk of having a second child with Down syndrome.
People with Down syndrome can have a variety of complications, some of which become more prominent as they get older. These complications can include:
Heart defects. About half the children with Down syndrome are born with some type of congenital heart defect. These heart problems can be life-threatening and may require surgery in early infancy.
Gastrointestinal (GI) defects. GI abnormalities occur in some children with Down syndrome and may include abnormalities of the intestines, esophagus, trachea and anus. The risk of developing digestive problems, such as GI blockage, heartburn (gastroesophageal reflux) or celiac disease, may be increased.
Immune disorders. Because of abnormalities in their immune systems, people with Down syndrome are at increased risk of developing autoimmune disorders, some forms of cancer, and infectious diseases, such as pneumonia.
Sleep apnea. Because of soft tissue and skeletal changes that lead to the obstruction of their airways, children and adults with Down syndrome are at greater risk of obstructive sleep apnea.
Obesity. People with Down syndrome have a greater tendency to be obese compared with the general population.
Spinal problems. Some people with Down syndrome may have a misalignment of the top two vertebrae in the neck (atlantoaxial instability). This condition puts them at risk of serious injury to the spinal cord from overextension of the neck.
Leukemia. Young children with Down syndrome have an increased risk of leukemia.
Dementia. People with Down syndrome have a greatly increased risk of dementia — signs and symptoms may begin around age 50. Having Down syndrome also increases the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
Other problems. Down syndrome may also be associated with other health conditions, including endocrine problems, dental problems, seizures, ear infections, and hearing and vision problems.
For people with Down syndrome, getting routine medical care and treating issues when needed can help with maintaining a healthy lifestyle.
Life spans have increased dramatically for people with Down syndrome. Today, someone with Down syndrome can expect to live more than 60 years, depending on the severity of health problems.
Symptoms are likely to appear weeks to months after a heart attack, surgery or injury to the chest. Symptoms might include: Chest pain, Fever.
Seek emergency care for persistent chest pain, which may indicate a recurring heart attack or other disorder.
Dressler's syndrome is associated with an immune system response to heart damage. Your body reacts to the injured tissue by sending immune cells and proteins (antibodies) to clean up and repair the affected area. Sometimes this response causes excessive inflammation in the pericardium.
Postpericardiotomy syndrome is a well-known complication that may occur after heart surgery.
The immune system response that leads to Dressler's syndrome might also cause fluid to accumulate in the membranes around your lungs (pleural effusion).
Rarely, Dressler's syndrome can cause more-serious complications, including:
Cardiac tamponade. Inflammation of the pericardium can cause fluids to accumulate in the sac (pericardial effusion). The fluid can put pressure on the heart, forcing it to work harder and reducing its ability to pump blood efficiently.
Constrictive pericarditis. Recurring or chronic inflammation can cause the pericardium to become thick or scarred. The scarring can reduce the heart's ability to pump blood efficiently.
Drug addiction symptoms or behaviors include, among others: Feeling that you have to use the drug regularly — daily or even several times a day, Having intense urges for the drug that block out any other thoughts, Over time, needing more of the drug to get the same effect, Taking larger amounts of the drug over a longer period of time than you intended, Making certain that you maintain a supply of the drug, Spending money on the drug, even though you can't afford it, Not meeting obligations and work responsibilities, or cutting back on social or recreational activities because of drug use, Continuing to use the drug, even though you know it's causing problems in your life or causing you physical or psychological harm, Doing things to get the drug that you normally wouldn't do, such as stealing, Driving or doing other risky activities when you're under the influence of the drug, Spending a good deal of time getting the drug, using the drug or recovering from the effects of the drug, Failing in your attempts to stop using the drug, Experiencing withdrawal symptoms when you attempt to stop taking the drug.
Sometimes it's difficult to distinguish normal teenage moodiness or angst from signs of drug use. Possible indications that your teenager or other family member is using drugs include: Problems at school or work — frequently missing school or work, a sudden disinterest in school activities or work, or a drop in grades or work performance, Physical health issues — lack of energy and motivation, weight loss or gain, or red eyes, Neglected appearance — lack of interest in clothing, grooming or looks, Changes in behavior — exaggerated efforts to bar family members from entering his or her room or being secretive about where he or she goes with friends; or drastic changes in behavior and in relationships with family and friends, Money issues — sudden requests for money without a reasonable explanation; or your discovery that money is missing or has been stolen or that items have disappeared from your home, indicating maybe they're being sold to support drug use.
Signs and symptoms of drug use or intoxication may vary, depending on the type of drug. Below you'll find several examples.
People use cannabis by smoking, eating or inhaling a vaporized form of the drug. Cannabis often precedes or is used along with other substances, such as alcohol or illegal drugs, and is often the first drug tried.
Signs and symptoms of recent use can include: A sense of euphoria or feeling "high", A heightened sense of visual, auditory and taste perception, Increased blood pressure and heart rate, Red eyes, Dry mouth, Decreased coordination, Difficulty concentrating or remembering, Slowed reaction time, Anxiety or paranoid thinking, Cannabis odor on clothes or yellow fingertips, Exaggerated cravings for certain foods at unusual times.
Long-term (chronic) use is often associated with: Decreased mental sharpness, Poor performance at school or at work, Reduced number of friends and interests.
Two groups of synthetic drugs — synthetic cannabinoids and substituted or synthetic cathinones — are illegal in most states. The effects of these drugs can be dangerous and unpredictable, as there is no quality control and some ingredients may not be known.
Synthetic cannabinoids, also called K2 or Spice, are sprayed on dried herbs and then smoked, but can be prepared as an herbal tea. Despite manufacturer claims, these are chemical compounds rather than "natural" or harmless products. These drugs can produce a "high" similar to marijuana and have become a popular but dangerous alternative.
Signs and symptoms of recent use can include: A sense of euphoria or feeling "high", Elevated mood, An altered sense of visual, auditory and taste perception, Extreme anxiety or agitation, Paranoia, Hallucinations, Increased heart rate and blood pressure or heart attack, Vomiting, Confusion.
Substituted cathinones, also called "bath salts," are mind-altering (psychoactive) substances similar to amphetamines such as ecstasy (MDMA) and cocaine. Packages are often labeled as other products to avoid detection.
Despite the name, these are not bath products such as Epsom salts. Substituted cathinones can be eaten, snorted, inhaled or injected and are highly addictive. These drugs can cause severe intoxication, which results in dangerous health effects or even death.
Signs and symptoms of recent use can include: Euphoria, Increased sociability, Increased energy and agitation, Increased sex drive, Increased heart rate and blood pressure, Problems thinking clearly, Loss of muscle control, Paranoia, Panic attacks, Hallucinations, Delirium, Psychotic and violent behavior.
Barbiturates, benzodiazepines and hypnotics are prescription central nervous system depressants. They're often used and misused in search for a sense of relaxation or a desire to "switch off" or forget stress-related thoughts or feelings.
Barbiturates. Examples include phenobarbital and secobarbital (Seconal).
Benzodiazepines. Examples include sedatives, such as diazepam (Valium), alprazolam (Xanax), lorazepam (Ativan), clonazepam (Klonopin) and chlordiazepoxide (Librium).
Hypnotics. Examples include prescription sleeping medications such as zolpidem (Ambien, Intermezzo, others) and zaleplon (Sonata).
Signs and symptoms of recent use can include: Drowsiness, Slurred speech, Lack of coordination, Irritability or changes in mood, Problems concentrating or thinking clearly, Memory problems, Involuntary eye movements, Lack of inhibition, Slowed breathing and reduced blood pressure, Falls or accidents, Dizziness.
Stimulants include amphetamines, meth (methamphetamine), cocaine, methylphenidate (Ritalin, Concerta, others) and amphetamine-dextroamphetamine (Adderall, Adderall XR, others). They are often used and misused in search of a "high," or to boost energy, to improve performance at work or school, or to lose weight or control appetite.
Signs and symptoms of recent use can include: Feeling of exhilaration and excess confidence, Increased alertness, Increased energy and restlessness, Behavior changes or aggression, Rapid or rambling speech, Dilated pupils, Confusion, delusions and hallucinations, Irritability, anxiety or paranoia, Changes in heart rate, blood pressure and body temperature, Nausea or vomiting with weight loss, Impaired judgment, Nasal congestion and damage to the mucous membrane of the nose (if snorting drugs), Mouth sores, gum disease and tooth decay from smoking drugs ("meth mouth"), Insomnia, Depression as the drug wears off.
Club drugs are commonly used at clubs, concerts and parties. Examples include ecstasy or molly (MDMA), gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), flunitrazepam (Rohypnol ― a brand used outside the U.S. ― also called roofie) and ketamine. These drugs are not all in the same category, but they share some similar effects and dangers, including long-term harmful effects.
Because GHB and flunitrazepam can cause sedation, muscle relaxation, confusion and memory loss, the potential for sexual misconduct or sexual assault is associated with the use of these drugs.
Signs and symptoms of use of club drugs can include: Hallucinations, Paranoia, Dilated pupils, Chills and sweating, Involuntary shaking (tremors), Behavior changes, Muscle cramping and teeth clenching, Muscle relaxation, poor coordination or problems moving, Reduced inhibitions, Heightened or altered sense of sight, sound and taste, Poor judgment, Memory problems or loss of memory, Reduced consciousness, Increased or decreased heart rate and blood pressure.
Use of hallucinogens can produce different signs and symptoms, depending on the drug. The most common hallucinogens are lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and phencyclidine (PCP).
LSD use may cause: Hallucinations, Greatly reduced perception of reality, for example, interpreting input from one of your senses as another, such as hearing colors, Impulsive behavior, Rapid shifts in emotions, Permanent mental changes in perception, Rapid heart rate and high blood pressure, Tremors, Flashbacks, a re-experience of the hallucinations — even years later.
PCP use may cause: A feeling of being separated from your body and surroundings, Hallucinations, Problems with coordination and movement, Aggressive, possibly violent behavior, Involuntary eye movements, Lack of pain sensation, Increase in blood pressure and heart rate, Problems with thinking and memory, Problems speaking, Impaired judgment, Intolerance to loud noise, Sometimes seizures or coma.
Signs and symptoms of inhalant use vary, depending on the substance. Some commonly inhaled substances include glue, paint thinners, correction fluid, felt tip marker fluid, gasoline, cleaning fluids and household aerosol products. Due to the toxic nature of these substances, users may develop brain damage or sudden death.
Signs and symptoms of use can include: Possessing an inhalant substance without a reasonable explanation, Brief euphoria or intoxication, Decreased inhibition, Combativeness or belligerence, Dizziness, Nausea or vomiting, Involuntary eye movements, Appearing intoxicated with slurred speech, slow movements and poor coordination, Irregular heartbeats, Tremors, Lingering odor of inhalant material, Rash around the nose and mouth.
Opioids are narcotic, painkilling drugs produced from opium or made synthetically. This class of drugs includes, among others, heroin, morphine, codeine, methadone and oxycodone.
Sometimes called the "opioid epidemic," addiction to opioid prescription pain medications has reached an alarming rate across the United States. Some people who've been using opioids over a long period of time may need physician-prescribed temporary or long-term drug substitution during treatment.
Signs and symptoms of narcotic use and dependence can include: Reduced sense of pain, Agitation, drowsiness or sedation, Slurred speech, Problems with attention and memory, Constricted pupils, Lack of awareness or inattention to surrounding people and things, Problems with coordination, Depression, Confusion, Constipation, Runny nose or nose sores (if snorting drugs), Needle marks (if injecting drugs).
If your drug use is out of control or causing problems, get help. The sooner you seek help, the greater your chances for a long-term recovery. Talk with your primary doctor or see a mental health professional, such as a doctor who specializes in addiction medicine or addiction psychiatry, or a licensed alcohol and drug counselor.
Make an appointment to see a doctor if: You can't stop using a drug, You continue using the drug despite the harm it causes, Your drug use has led to unsafe behavior, such as sharing needles or unprotected sex, You think you may be having withdrawal symptoms after stopping drug use.
If you're not ready to approach a doctor, help lines or hotlines may be a good place to learn about treatment. You can find these lines listed on the internet or in the phone book.
Seek emergency help if you or someone you know has taken a drug and: May have overdosed, Shows changes in consciousness, Has trouble breathing, Has seizures or convulsions, Has signs of a possible heart attack, such as chest pain or pressure, Has any other troublesome physical or psychological reaction to use of the drug.
People struggling with addiction usually deny that their drug use is problematic and are reluctant to seek treatment. An intervention presents a loved one with a structured opportunity to make changes before things get even worse and can motivate someone to seek or accept help.
An intervention should be carefully planned and may be done by family and friends in consultation with a doctor or professional such as a licensed alcohol and drug counselor, or directed by an intervention professional. It involves family and friends and sometimes co-workers, clergy or others who care about the person struggling with addiction.
During the intervention, these people gather together to have a direct, heart-to-heart conversation with the person about the consequences of addiction and ask him or her to accept treatment.
Like many mental health disorders, several factors may contribute to development of drug addiction. The main factors are:
Environment. Environmental factors, including your family's beliefs and attitudes and exposure to a peer group that encourages drug use, seem to play a role in initial drug use.
Genetics. Once you've started using a drug, the development into addiction may be influenced by inherited (genetic) traits, which may delay or speed up the disease progression.
Physical addiction appears to occur when repeated use of a drug changes the way your brain feels pleasure. The addicting drug causes physical changes to some nerve cells (neurons) in your brain. Neurons use chemicals called neurotransmitters to communicate. These changes can remain long after you stop using the drug.
People of any age, sex or economic status can become addicted to a drug. Certain factors can affect the likelihood and speed of developing an addiction:
Family history of addiction. Drug addiction is more common in some families and likely involves genetic predisposition. If you have a blood relative, such as a parent or sibling, with alcohol or drug addiction, you're at greater risk of developing a drug addiction.
Mental health disorder. If you have a mental health disorder such as depression, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or post-traumatic stress disorder, you're more likely to become addicted to drugs. Using drugs can become a way of coping with painful feelings, such as anxiety, depression and loneliness, and can make these problems even worse.
Peer pressure. Peer pressure is a strong factor in starting to use and misuse drugs, particularly for young people.
Lack of family involvement. Difficult family situations or lack of a bond with your parents or siblings may increase the risk of addiction, as can a lack of parental supervision.
Early use. Using drugs at an early age can cause changes in the developing brain and increase the likelihood of progressing to drug addiction.
Taking a highly addictive drug. Some drugs, such as stimulants, cocaine or opioid painkillers, may result in faster development of addiction than other drugs. Smoking or injecting drugs can increase the potential for addiction. Taking drugs considered less addicting — so-called "light drugs" — can start you on a pathway of drug use and addiction.
Drug use can have significant and damaging short-term and long-term effects. Taking some drugs can be particularly risky, especially if you take high doses or combine them with other drugs or alcohol. Here are some examples.
Methamphetamine, opiates and cocaine are highly addictive and cause multiple short-term and long-term health consequences, including psychotic behavior, seizures or death due to overdose.
GHB and flunitrazepam may cause sedation, confusion and memory loss. These so-called "date rape drugs" are known to impair the ability to resist unwanted contact and recollection of the event. At high doses, they can cause seizures, coma and death. The danger increases when these drugs are taken with alcohol.
Ecstasy or molly (MDMA) can cause dehydration, electrolyte imbalance and complications that can include seizures. Long-term, MDMA can damage the brain.
One particular danger of club drugs is that the liquid, pill or powder forms of these drugs available on the street often contain unknown substances that can be harmful, including other illegally manufactured or pharmaceutical drugs.
Due to the toxic nature of inhalants, users may develop brain damage of different levels of severity.
Dependence on drugs can create a number of dangerous and damaging complications, including:
Getting a communicable disease. People who are addicted to a drug are more likely to get an infectious disease, such as HIV, either through unsafe sex or by sharing needles.
Other health problems. Drug addiction can lead to a range of both short-term and long-term mental and physical health problems. These depend on what drug is taken.
Accidents. People who are addicted to drugs are more likely to drive or do other dangerous activities while under the influence.
Suicide. People who are addicted to drugs die by suicide more often than people who aren't addicted.
Family problems. Behavioral changes may cause marital or family conflict and custody issues.
Work issues. Drug use can cause declining performance at work, absenteeism and eventual loss of employment.
Problems at school. Drug use can negatively affect academic performance and motivation to excel in school.
Legal issues. Legal problems are common for drug users and can stem from buying or possessing illegal drugs, stealing to support the drug addiction, driving while under the influence of drugs or alcohol, or disputes over child custody.
Financial problems. Spending money to support drug use takes away money from other needs, could lead to debt, and can lead to illegal or unethical behaviors.
Signs and symptoms of a serious drug allergy often occur within an hour after taking a drug. Other reactions, particularly rashes, can occur hours, days or weeks later.
Drug allergy signs and symptoms may include: Skin rash, Hives, Itching, Fever, Swelling, Shortness of breath, Wheezing, Runny nose, Itchy, watery eyes.
Anaphylaxis is a rare, life-threatening reaction to a drug allergy that causes the widespread dysfunction of body systems. Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include: Tightening of the airways and throat, causing trouble breathing, Nausea or abdominal cramps, Vomiting or diarrhea, Dizziness or lightheadedness, Weak, rapid pulse, Drop in blood pressure, Seizure, Loss of consciousness.
Less common drug allergy reactions occur days or weeks after exposure to a drug and may persist for some time after you stop taking the drug. These conditions include: Serum sickness, which may cause fever, joint pain, rash, swelling and nausea, Drug-induced anemia, a reduction in red blood cells, which can cause fatigue, irregular heartbeats, shortness of breath and other symptoms, Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), which results in rash, high white blood cell count, general swelling, swollen lymph nodes and recurrence of dormant hepatitis infection, Inflammation in the kidneys (nephritis), which can cause fever, blood in the urine, general swelling, confusion and other symptoms.
Call 911 or emergency medical help if you experience signs of a severe reaction or suspected anaphylaxis after taking a medication.
If you have milder symptoms of a drug allergy, see your doctor as soon as possible.
A drug allergy occurs when your immune system mistakenly identifies a drug as a harmful substance, such as a virus or bacterium. Once your immune system detects a drug as a harmful substance, it will develop an antibody specific to that drug. This can happen the first time you take a drug, but sometimes an allergy doesn't develop until there have been repeated exposures.
The next time you take the drug, these specific antibodies flag the drug and direct immune system attacks on the substance. Chemicals released by this activity cause the signs and symptoms associated with an allergic reaction.
You may not be aware of your first exposure to a drug, however. Some evidence suggests that trace amounts of a drug in the food supply, such as an antibiotic, may be sufficient for the immune system to create an antibody to it.
Some allergic reactions may result from a somewhat different process. Researchers believe that some drugs can bind directly to a certain type of immune system white blood cell called a T cell. This event sets in motion the release of chemicals that can cause an allergic reaction the first time you take the drug.
Although any drug can cause an allergic reaction, some drugs are more commonly associated with allergies. These include: Antibiotics, such as penicillin, Pain-relievers, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB) and naproxen sodium (Aleve), Chemotherapy drugs for treating cancer, Medications for autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis.
Sometimes a reaction to a drug can produce signs and symptoms virtually the same as those of a drug allergy, but a drug reaction isn't triggered by immune system activity. This condition is called a nonallergic hypersensitivity reaction or pseudoallergic drug reaction.
Drugs that are more commonly associated with this condition include: Aspirin, Dyes used in imaging tests (radiocontrast media), Opiates for treating pain, Local anesthetics.
While anyone can have an allergic reaction to a drug, a few factors can increase your risk. These include: A history of other allergies, such as food allergy or hay fever, A personal or family history of drug allergy, Increased exposure to a drug, because of high doses, repetitive use or prolonged use, Certain illnesses commonly associated with allergic drug reactions, such as infection with HIV or the Epstein-Barr virus.
Signs and symptoms, which usually affect both eyes, may include: A stinging, burning or scratchy sensation in your eyes, Stringy mucus in or around your eyes, Sensitivity to light, Eye redness, A sensation of having something in your eyes, Difficulty wearing contact lenses, Difficulty with nighttime driving, Watery eyes, which is the body's response to the irritation of dry eyes, Blurred vision or eye fatigue.
See your doctor if you've had prolonged signs and symptoms of dry eyes, including red, irritated, tired or painful eyes. Your doctor can take steps to determine what's bothering your eyes or refer you to a specialist.
Dry eyes are caused by a variety of reasons that disrupt the healthy tear film. Your tear film has three layers: fatty oils, aqueous fluid and mucus. This combination normally keeps the surface of your eyes lubricated, smooth and clear. Problems with any of these layers can cause dry eyes.
Reasons for tear film dysfunction are many, including hormone changes, autoimmune disease, inflamed eyelid glands or allergic eye disease. For some people, the cause of dry eyes is decreased tear production or increased tear evaporation.
Dry eyes can occur when you're unable to produce enough water (aqueous fluid). The medical term for this condition is keratoconjunctivitis sicca (ker-uh-toe-kun-junk-tih-VY-tis SIK-uh). Common causes of decreased tear production include: Aging, Certain medical conditions including Sjogren's syndrome, allergic eye disease, rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, scleroderma, graft vs. host disease, sarcoidosis, thyroid disorders or vitamin A deficiency, Certain medications, including antihistamines, decongestants, hormone replacement therapy, antidepressants, and drugs for high blood pressure, acne, birth control and Parkinson's disease, Corneal nerve desensitivity caused by contact lens use, nerve damage or that caused by laser eye surgery, though symptoms of dry eyes related to this procedure are usually temporary.
The oil film produced by small glands on the edge of your eyelids (meibomian glands) might become clogged. Blocked meibomian glands are more common in people with rosacea or other skin disorders.
Common causes of increased tear evaporation include: Posterior blepharitis (meibomian gland dysfunction), Blinking less often, which tends to occur with certain conditions, such as Parkinson's disease; or when you're concentrating during certain activities, such as while reading, driving or working at a computer, Eyelid problems, such as the lids turning outward (ectropion) and the lids turning inward (entropion), Eye allergies, Preservatives in topical eyedrops, Wind, smoke or dry air, Vitamin A deficiency.
Factors that make it more likely that you'll experience dry eyes include:
Being older than 50. Tear production tends to diminish as you get older. Dry eyes are more common in people over 50.
Being a woman. A lack of tears is more common in women, especially if they experience hormonal changes due to pregnancy, using birth control pills or menopause.
Eating a diet that is low in vitamin A, which is found in liver, carrots and broccoli, or low in omega-3 fatty acids, which are found in fish, walnuts and vegetable oils.
Wearing contact lenses or having a history of refractive surgery.
People who have dry eyes may experience these complications:
Eye infections. Your tears protect the surface of your eyes from infection. Without adequate tears, you may have an increased risk of eye infection.
Damage to the surface of your eyes. If left untreated, severe dry eyes may lead to eye inflammation, abrasion of the corneal surface, corneal ulcers and vision loss.
Decreased quality of life. Dry eyes can make it difficult to perform everyday activities, such as reading.
Dry macular degeneration symptoms usually develop gradually and without pain. They may include: Visual distortions, such as straight lines seeming bent, Reduced central vision in one or both eyes, The need for brighter light when reading or doing close work, Increased difficulty adapting to low light levels, such as when entering a dimly lit restaurant, Increased blurriness of printed words, Decreased intensity or brightness of colors, Difficulty recognizing faces.
Dry macular degeneration usually affects both eyes. If only one eye is affected, you may not notice any changes in your vision because your good eye may compensate for the weak eye. And the condition doesn't affect side (peripheral) vision, so it rarely causes total blindness.
Dry macular degeneration is one of two types of age-related macular degeneration. It can progress to wet (neovascular) macular degeneration, which is characterized by blood vessels that grow under the retina and leak. The dry type is more common, but it usually progresses slowly (over years). The wet type is more likely to cause a relatively sudden change in vision resulting in serious vision loss.
See your eye doctor if: You notice changes in your central vision, Your ability to see colors and fine detail becomes impaired.
These changes may be the first indication of macular degeneration, particularly if you're over age 50.
No one knows exactly what causes dry macular degeneration. But research indicates it may be related to a combination of heredity and environmental factors, including smoking and diet.
The condition develops as the eye ages. Dry macular degeneration affects the macula — an area of the retina that's responsible for clear vision in your direct line of sight. Over time tissue in your macula may thin and break down.
Factors that may increase your risk of macular degeneration include:
Age. This disease is most common in people over 50.
Family history and genetics. This disease has a hereditary component. Researchers have identified several genes that are related to developing the condition.
Race. Macular degeneration is more common in Caucasians.
Smoking. Smoking cigarettes or being regularly exposed to smoke significantly increases your risk of macular degeneration.
Obesity. Research indicates that being obese may increase your chance that early or intermediate macular degeneration will progress to the more severe form of the disease.
Cardiovascular disease. If you have had diseases that affected your heart and blood vessels, you may be at higher risk of macular degeneration.
People whose dry macular degeneration has progressed to central vision loss have a higher risk of depression and social isolation. With profound loss of vision, people may see visual hallucinations (Charles Bonnet syndrome). And dry macular degeneration may progress to wet macular degeneration, which can cause rapid vision loss if left untreated.
If you're not producing enough saliva, you may notice these signs and symptoms all or most of the time: Dryness or a feeling of stickiness in your mouth, Saliva that seems thick and stringy, Bad breath, Difficulty chewing, speaking and swallowing, Dry or sore throat and hoarseness, Dry or grooved tongue, A changed sense of taste, Problems wearing dentures.
In addition, dry mouth may result in lipstick sticking to the teeth.
If you've noticed persistent dry mouth signs and symptoms, make an appointment with your doctor.
Dry mouth is caused when the salivary glands in the mouth don't make enough saliva to keep your mouth wet. These glands may not work properly as the result of:
Medications. Hundreds of medications, including many over-the-counter drugs, produce dry mouth as a side effect. Among the more likely types to cause problems are some of the drugs used to treat depression, high blood pressure and anxiety, as well as some antihistamines, decongestants, muscle relaxants and pain medications.
Aging. Many older people experience dry mouth as they age. Contributing factors include the use of certain medications, changes in the body's ability to process medication, inadequate nutrition, and having long-term health problems.
Cancer therapy. Chemotherapy drugs can change the nature of saliva and the amount produced. This may be temporary, with normal salivary flow returning after treatment is completed. Radiation treatments to your head and neck can damage salivary glands, causing a marked decrease in saliva production. This may be temporary or permanent, depending on the radiation dose and area treated.
Nerve damage. An injury or surgery that causes nerve damage to your head and neck area can result in dry mouth.
Other health conditions. Dry mouth can be due to certain health conditions, such as diabetes, stroke, yeast infection (thrush) in your mouth or Alzheimer's disease, or due to autoimmune diseases, such as Sjogren's syndrome or HIV/AIDS. Snoring and breathing with your mouth open also can contribute to dry mouth.
Tobacco and alcohol use. Drinking alcohol and smoking or chewing tobacco can increase dry mouth symptoms.
Recreational drug use. Methamphetamine use can cause severe dry mouth and damage to teeth, a condition also known as "meth mouth." Marijuana also can cause dry mouth.
If you don't have enough saliva and develop dry mouth, this can lead to: Increased plaque, tooth decay and gum disease, Mouth sores, Yeast infection in your mouth (thrush), Sores or split skin at the corners of your mouth, or cracked lips, Poor nutrition from having problems with chewing and swallowing.
Dry skin is often temporary — you get it only in winter, for example — but it may be a lifelong condition. Signs and symptoms of dry skin depend on your age, your health, where you live, time spent outdoors and the cause of the problem. Dry skin is likely to cause one or more of the following: A feeling of skin tightness, especially after showering, bathing or swimming, Skin that feels and looks rough, Itching (pruritus), Slight to severe flaking, scaling or peeling, Fine lines or cracks, Gray, ashy skin, Redness, Deep cracks that may bleed.
Most cases of dry skin respond well to lifestyle and home remedies. See your doctor if: Your skin doesn't improve in spite of your best efforts, Dry skin is accompanied by redness, Dryness and itching interfere with sleeping, You have open sores or infections from scratching, You have large areas of scaling or peeling skin.
Dry skin (xerosis) often has an environmental cause. Certain diseases also can significantly affect your skin. Potential causes of dry skin include:
Weather. Skin tends to be driest in winter, when temperatures and humidity levels plummet. But the season may not matter as much if you live in desert regions.
Heat. Central heating, wood-burning stoves, space heaters and fireplaces all reduce humidity and dry your skin.
Hot baths and showers. Taking long, hot showers or baths can dry your skin. So can frequent swimming, particularly in heavily chlorinated pools.
Harsh soaps and detergents. Many popular soaps, detergents and shampoos strip moisture from your skin as they are formulated to remove oil.
Other skin conditions. People with skin conditions such as atopic dermatitis (eczema) or psoriasis are prone to dry skin.
Anyone can develop dry skin. But you may be more likely to develop the condition if you:
Are in your 40s or older. The risk increases with age — more than 50 percent of older adults have dry skin.
Live in dry, cold or low-humidity climates.
Have a job that requires you to immerse your skin in water, such as nursing and hairstyling.
Swim frequently in chlorinated pools.
Dry skin is usually harmless. But when it's not cared for, dry skin may lead to:
Atopic dermatitis (eczema). If you're prone to develop this condition, excessive dryness can lead to activation of the disease, causing redness, cracking and inflammation.
Infections. Dry skin may crack, allowing bacteria to enter, causing infections.
These complications are most likely to occur when your skin's normal protective mechanisms are severely compromised. For example, severely dry skin can cause deep cracks or fissures, which can open and bleed, providing an avenue for invading bacteria.
Signs and symptoms of dry socket may include: Severe pain within a few days after a tooth extraction, Partial or total loss of the blood clot at the tooth extraction site, which you may notice as an empty-looking (dry) socket, Visible bone in the socket, Pain that radiates from the socket to your ear, eye, temple or neck on the same side of your face as the extraction, Bad breath or a foul odor coming from your mouth, Unpleasant taste in your mouth.
A certain degree of pain and discomfort is normal after a tooth extraction. However, you should be able to manage normal pain with the pain reliever prescribed by your dentist or oral surgeon, and the pain should lessen with time.
If you develop new or worsening pain in the days after your tooth extraction, contact your dentist or oral surgeon immediately.
The precise cause of dry socket remains the subject of study. Researchers suspect that certain issues may be involved, such as: Bacterial contamination of the socket, Trauma at the surgical site from a difficult extraction, as with an impacted wisdom tooth.
Factors that can increase your risk of developing dry socket include:
Smoking and tobacco use. Chemicals in cigarettes or other forms of tobacco may prevent or slow healing and contaminate the wound site. The act of sucking on a cigarette may physically dislodge the blood clot prematurely.
Oral contraceptives. High estrogen levels from oral contraceptives may disrupt normal healing processes and increase the risk of dry socket.
Improper at-home care. Failure to follow home-care guidelines and poor oral hygiene may increase the risk of dry socket.
Having dry socket in the past. If you've had dry socket in the past, you're more likely to develop it after another extraction.
Tooth or gum infection. Current or previous infections around the extracted tooth increase the risk of dry socket.
Painful, dry socket rarely results in infection or serious complications. However, potential complications may include delayed healing of or infection in the socket or progression to chronic bone infection (osteomyelitis).
DCIS doesn't typically have any signs or symptoms. However, DCIS can sometimes cause signs such as: A breast lump, Bloody nipple discharge.
DCIS is usually found on a mammogram and appears as small clusters of calcifications that have irregular shapes and sizes.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice a change in your breasts, such as a lump, an area of puckered or otherwise unusual skin, a thickened region under the skin, or nipple discharge.
Ask your doctor when you should consider breast cancer screening and how often it should be repeated. Most groups recommend considering routine breast cancer screening beginning in your 40s. Talk with your doctor about what's right for you.
It's not clear what causes DCIS. DCIS forms when genetic mutations occur in the DNA of breast duct cells. The genetic mutations cause the cells to appear abnormal, but the cells don't yet have the ability to break out of the breast duct.
Researchers don't know exactly what triggers the abnormal cell growth that leads to DCIS. Factors that may play a part include your lifestyle, your environment and genes passed to you from your parents.
Factors that may increase your risk of DCIS include: Increasing age, Personal history of benign breast disease, such as atypical hyperplasia, Family history of breast cancer, Never having been pregnant, Having your first baby after age 30, Having your first period before age 12, Beginning menopause after age 55, Genetic mutations that increase the risk of breast cancer, such as those in the breast cancer genes BRCA1 and BRCA2.
Signs and symptoms of dumping syndrome generally occur right after eating, especially after a meal rich in table sugar (sucrose) or fruit sugar (fructose). Signs and symptoms might include: Feeling bloated or too full after eating, Nausea, Vomiting, Abdominal cramps, Diarrhea, Flushing, Dizziness, lightheadedness, Rapid heart rate.
Late dumping syndrome starts one to three hours after you eat a high-sugar meal. The signs and symptoms develop that long after you eat because your body releases large amounts of insulin to absorb the sugars entering your small intestine. The result is low blood sugar.
Signs and symptoms of late dumping syndrome can include: Sweating, Flushing, Dizziness, lightheadedness, Weakness, Rapid heart rate.
Some people have both early and late signs and symptoms. And dumping syndrome can develop years after surgery.
Contact your doctor if any of the following apply to you.
You develop signs and symptoms that might be due to dumping syndrome, even if you haven't had surgery.
Your symptoms are not controlled by dietary changes.
You are losing large amounts of weight due to dumping syndrome. Your doctor may refer you to a registered dietitian to help you create an eating plan.
In dumping syndrome, food and gastric juices from your stomach move to your small intestine in an uncontrolled, abnormally fast manner. This is most often related to changes in your stomach associated with surgery.
Dumping syndrome can occur after any stomach surgery or major esophageal surgery, such as removal of the esophagus (esophagectomy).
Surgery that alters your stomach can increase your risk of dumping syndrome. These surgeries are most commonly performed to treat obesity, but are also part of treatment for stomach cancer, esophageal cancer and other conditions. These surgeries include:
Gastrectomy, in which a portion or all of your stomach is removed.
Gastric bypass surgery (Roux-en-Y operation), which is performed to treat morbid obesity. It surgically creates a stomach pouch smaller than the stomach, meaning that you're no longer able to eat as much as you once did. It connects the small intestine to this pouch in the form of a gastrojejunostomy.
Esophagectomy, in which all or part of the tube between the mouth and the stomach is removed.
Dupuytren's contracture typically progresses slowly, over years. The condition usually begins as a thickening of the skin on the palm of your hand. As it progresses, the skin on your palm might appear puckered or dimpled. A firm lump of tissue can form on your palm. This lump might be sensitive to the touch but usually isn't painful.
In later stages of Dupuytren's contracture, cords of tissue form under the skin on your palm and can extend up to your fingers. As these cords tighten, your fingers might be pulled toward your palm, sometimes severely.
The two fingers farthest from the thumb are most commonly affected, though the middle finger also can be involved. Only rarely are the thumb and index finger affected. Dupuytren's contracture can occur in both hands, though one hand is usually affected more severely.
Doctors don't know what causes Dupuytren's contracture. There's no evidence that hand injuries or occupations that involve vibrations to the hands cause the condition.
A number of factors are believed to increase your risk of the disease, including:
Age. Dupuytren's contracture occurs most commonly after the age of 50.
Sex. Men are more likely to develop Dupuytren's and to have more severe contractures than are women.
Ancestry. People of Northern European descent are at higher risk of the disease.
Family history. Dupuytren's contracture often runs in families.
Tobacco and alcohol use. Smoking is associated with an increased risk of Dupuytren's contracture, perhaps because of microscopic changes within blood vessels caused by smoking. Alcohol intake also is associated with Dupuytren's.
Diabetes. People with diabetes are reported to have an increased risk of Dupuytren's contracture.
Dupuytren's contracture can make it difficult to perform certain functions using your hand. Since the thumb and index finger aren't usually affected, many people don't have much inconvenience or disability with fine motor activities such as writing. But as Dupuytren's contracture progresses, it can limit your ability to fully open your hand, grasp large objects or to get your hand into narrow places.
Some people with a dAVF may not have any symptoms. However, apparent symptoms can be characterized either as aggressive or benign.
Aggressive dAVF symptoms can result either from bleeding in the brain (intracerebral hemorrhage) or from neurological effects of non-hemorrhaging neurological deficits (NHNDs).
Bleeding in the brain often causes sudden onset of a headache with varying degrees of neurological disability related to the location and size of the hemorrhage.
By contrast, an NHND usually develops more gradually, over days to weeks, and typically produces a set of symptoms related to its location. These aggressive symptoms can include seizures, speech or language issues, face pain, dementia, Parkinsonism, coordination issues, burning or prickling sensations, weakness, apathy, failure to thrive, and symptoms related to increased pressure such as headaches, nausea and vomiting.
More benign dAVF symptoms can include both hearing issues (often a bruit behind the ear, also known as pulsatile tinnitus) and vision problems including visual deterioration, eye bulge, swelling in the eye lining, eye-related palsies and cavernous sinus syndrome.
In rare cases, progressive dementia may occur due to venous hypertension.
Make an appointment with a doctor if you develop any signs or symptoms that seem unusual or that worry you.
Seek medical help immediately if you experience any symptoms of seizure, or symptoms that suggest brain hemorrhage, such as: Sudden, severe headache, Nausea, Vomiting, Weakness or numbness on one side of the body, Difficulties in speaking or understanding speech, Loss of vision, Double vision, Balance difficulties.
Most dural arteriovenous fistulas have no clear origin, although some result from identifiable causes such as traumatic head injury, infection, previous brain surgery or tumors. Most authorities think that dAVFs involving the larger brain veins usually arise from progressive narrowing or blockage of one of the brain's venous sinuses, which route circulated blood from the brain back to the heart.
Genetic risk factors for dAVFs include those predisposing to vein thrombosis, such as coagulation abnormalities that increase the risk for occlusion of the vein sinuses.
Most frequently, dAVFs affect people in their late-middle years (roughly from 50 to 60 years old). However, dAVFs can occur in younger age groups as well, including in children.
Recent evidence does suggest that benign meningeal tumors may also be associated with the development of dAVFs.
Dust mite allergy symptoms caused by inflammation of nasal passages include: Sneezing, Runny nose, Itchy, red or watery eyes, Nasal congestion, Itchy nose, roof of mouth or throat, Postnasal drip, Cough, Facial pressure and pain, Swollen, blue-colored skin under your eyes, In a child, frequent upward rubbing of the nose.
If your dust mite allergy contributes to asthma, you may also experience: Difficulty breathing, Chest tightness or pain, An audible whistling or wheezing sound when exhaling, Trouble sleeping caused by shortness of breath, coughing or wheezing, Bouts of coughing or wheezing that are worsened by a respiratory virus such as a cold or the flu.
A dust mite allergy can range from mild to severe. A mild case of dust mite allergy may cause an occasional runny nose, watery eyes and sneezing. In severe cases, the condition may be ongoing (chronic), resulting in persistent sneezing, cough, congestion, facial pressure or severe asthma attack.
Some signs and symptoms of dust mite allergy, such as a runny nose or sneezing, are similar to those of the common cold. Sometimes it's difficult to know whether you have a cold or an allergy. If symptoms persist for longer than one week, you might have an allergy.
If your signs and symptoms are severe — such as severe nasal congestion, wheezing or difficulty sleeping — call your doctor. Seek emergency care if wheezing or shortness of breath rapidly worsens or if you are short of breath with minimal activity.
Allergies occur when your immune system reacts to a foreign substance such as pollen, pet dander or dust mites. Your immune system produces proteins known as antibodies that protect you from unwanted invaders that could make you sick or cause an infection.
When you have allergies, your immune system makes antibodies that identify your particular allergen as something harmful, even though it isn't. When you come into contact with the allergen, your immune system produces an inflammatory response in your nasal passages or lungs. Prolonged or regular exposure to the allergen can cause the ongoing (chronic) inflammation associated with asthma.
Dust mites eat organic matter such as skin cells people have shed, and rather than drinking water, they absorb water from humidity in the atmosphere.
Dust also contains the feces and decaying bodies of dust mites, and it's the proteins present in this dust mite "debris" that are the culprit in dust mite allergy.
The following factors increase your risk of developing a dust mite allergy:
Having a family history of allergies. You're more likely to develop a sensitivity to dust mites if several members of your family have allergies.
Exposure to dust mites. Being exposed to high levels of dust mites, especially early in life, increases your risk.
Being a child or a young adult. You're more likely to develop dust mite allergy during childhood or early adulthood.
If you have a dust mite allergy, exposure to the mites and their debris can cause complications.
Sinus infections. Ongoing (chronic) inflammation of tissues in the nasal passages caused by dust mite allergy can obstruct your sinuses, the hollow cavities connected to your nasal passages. These obstructions may make you more likely to develop infections of the sinuses (sinusitis).
Asthma. People with asthma and dust mite allergy often have difficulty managing asthma symptoms. They may be at risk of asthma attacks that require immediate medical treatment or emergency care.
Signs and symptoms — other than short stature — vary considerably across the spectrum of disorders.
Most people with dwarfism have disorders that cause disproportionately short stature. Usually, this means that a person has an average-size trunk and very short limbs, but some people may have a very short trunk and shortened (but disproportionately large) limbs. In these disorders, the head is disproportionately large compared with the body.
Almost all people with disproportionate dwarfism have normal intellectual capacities. Rare exceptions are usually the result of a secondary factor, such as excess fluid around the brain (hydrocephalus).
The most common cause of dwarfism is a disorder called achondroplasia, which causes disproportionately short stature. This disorder usually results in the following: An average-size trunk, Short arms and legs, with particularly short upper arms and upper legs, Short fingers, often with a wide separation between the middle and ring fingers, Limited mobility at the elbows, A disproportionately large head, with a prominent forehead and a flattened bridge of the nose, Progressive development of bowed legs, Progressive development of swayed lower back, An adult height around 4 feet (122 cm).
Another cause of disproportionate dwarfism is a rare disorder called spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (SEDC). Signs may include: A very short trunk, A short neck, Shortened arms and legs, Average-size hands and feet, Broad, rounded chest, Slightly flattened cheekbones, Opening in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), Hip deformities that result in thighbones turning inward, A foot that's twisted or out of shape, Instability of the neck bones, Progressive hunching curvature of the upper spine, Progressive development of swayed lower back, Vision and hearing problems, Arthritis and problems with joint movement, Adult height ranging from 3 feet (91 cm) to just over 4 feet (122 cm).
Proportionate dwarfism results from medical conditions present at birth or appearing in early childhood that limit overall growth and development. So the head, trunk and limbs are all small, but they're proportionate to each other. Because these disorders affect overall growth, many of them result in poor development of one or more body systems.
Growth hormone deficiency is a relatively common cause of proportionate dwarfism. It occurs when the pituitary gland fails to produce an adequate supply of growth hormone, which is essential for normal childhood growth. Signs include: Height below the third percentile on standard pediatric growth charts, Growth rate slower than expected for age, Delayed or no sexual development during the teen years.
Signs and symptoms of disproportionate dwarfism are often present at birth or in early infancy. Proportionate dwarfism may not be immediately apparent. See your child's doctor if you have any concerns about your child's growth or overall development.
Most dwarfism-related conditions are genetic disorders, but the causes of some disorders are unknown. Most occurrences of dwarfism result from a random genetic mutation in either the father's sperm or the mother's egg rather than from either parent's complete genetic makeup.
About 80 percent of people with achondroplasia are born to parents of average height. A person with achondroplasia and with two average-size parents received one mutated copy of the gene associated with the disorder and one normal copy of the gene. A person with the disorder may pass along either a mutated or normal copy to his or her own children.
Turner syndrome, a condition that affects only girls and women, results when a sex chromosome (the X chromosome) is missing or partially missing. A female inherits an X chromosome from each parent. A girl with Turner syndrome has only one fully functioning copy of the female sex chromosome rather than two.
The cause of growth hormone deficiency can sometimes be traced to a genetic mutation or injury, but for most people with the disorder, no cause can be identified.
Other causes of dwarfism include other genetic disorders, deficiencies in other hormones or poor nutrition. Sometimes the cause is unknown.
Complications of dwarfism-related disorders can vary greatly, but some complications are common to a number of conditions.
The characteristic features of the skull, spine and limbs shared by most forms of disproportionate dwarfism result in some common problems: Delays in motor skills development, such as sitting up, crawling and walking, Frequent ear infections and risk of hearing loss, Bowing of the legs, Difficulty breathing during sleep (sleep apnea), Pressure on the spinal cord at the base of the skull, Excess fluid around the brain (hydrocephalus), Crowded teeth, Progressive severe hunching or swaying of the back with back pain or problems breathing, Narrowing of the channel in the lower spine (spinal stenosis), resulting in pressure on the spinal cord and subsequent pain or numbness in the legs, Arthritis, Weight gain that can further complicate problems with joints and the spine and place pressure on nerves.
With proportionate dwarfism, problems in growth and development often result in complications with poorly developed organs. For example, heart problems that often occur with Turner syndrome can have a significant effect on health. An absence of sexual maturation associated with growth hormone deficiency or Turner syndrome affects both physical development and social functioning.
Women with disproportionate dwarfism may develop respiratory problems during pregnancy. A C-section (cesarean delivery) is almost always necessary because the size and shape of the pelvis doesn't allow for successful vaginal delivery.
Most people with dwarfism prefer not to be labeled by a condition. However, some people may refer to themselves as dwarfs, little people or people of short stature. The word "midget" is generally considered an offensive term.
People of average height may have misconceptions about people with dwarfism. And the portrayal of people with dwarfism in modern movies often includes stereotypes. Misconceptions can impact a person's self-esteem and limit opportunities for success in school or employment.
Children with dwarfism are particularly vulnerable to teasing and ridicule from classmates. Because dwarfism is relatively uncommon, children may feel isolated from their peers.
Signs and symptoms of dysarthria vary, depending on the underlying cause and the type of dysarthria. They may include: Slurred speech, Slow speech, Inability to speak louder than a whisper or speaking too loudly, Rapid speech that is difficult to understand, Nasal, raspy or strained voice, Uneven or abnormal speech rhythm, Uneven speech volume, Monotone speech, Difficulty moving your tongue or facial muscles.
Dysarthria can be a sign of a serious condition. See your doctor if you have sudden or unexplained changes in your ability to speak.
In dysarthria, you may have difficulty moving the muscles in your mouth, face or upper respiratory system that control speech. Conditions that may lead to dysarthria include:
Some medications, such as certain sedatives and seizure drugs, also can cause dysarthria.
Because of the communication problems dysarthria causes, complications can include:
Social difficulty. Communication problems may affect your relationships with family and friends and make social situations challenging.
Depression. In some people, dysarthria may lead to social isolation and depression.
The blisters associated with dyshidrosis occur most commonly on the sides of the fingers and the palms. Sometimes the soles of the feet also can be affected. The blisters are usually small — about the width of a standard pencil lead — and grouped in clusters, with an appearance similar to tapioca.
In more-severe cases, the small blisters may merge to form larger blisters. Skin affected by dyshidrosis can be painful and very itchy. Once the blisters dry and flake off, which occurs in about three weeks, the underlying skin may be red and tender.
Dyshidrosis tends to recur fairly regularly for months or years.
Call your doctor if you have a rash on your hands or feet that doesn't go away on its own.
The exact cause of dyshidrosis isn't known. It can be associated with a similar skin disorder called atopic dermatitis (eczema), as well as with allergic conditions, such as hay fever. Eruptions may be seasonal in people with nasal allergies.
Risk factors for dyshidrosis include:
Stress. Dyshidrosis appears to be more common during times of emotional or physical stress.
Exposure to certain metals. These include cobalt and nickel — usually in an industrial setting.
Sensitive skin. People who develop a rash after contact with certain irritants are more likely to experience dyshidrosis.
Atopic dermatitis. Some people with atopic dermatitis may develop dyshidrotic eczema.
For most people with dyshidrosis, it's just an itchy inconvenience. For others, the pain and itching may limit the use of their hands or feet. Intense scratching can increase the risk of a bacterial infection developing in the affected skin.
Signs of dyslexia can be difficult to recognize before your child enters school, but some early clues may indicate a problem. Once your child reaches school age, your child's teacher may be the first to notice a problem. Severity varies, but the condition often becomes apparent as a child starts learning to read.
Signs that a young child may be at risk of dyslexia include: Late talking, Learning new words slowly, Problems forming words correctly, such as reversing sounds in words or confusing words that sound alike, Problems remembering or naming letters, numbers and colors, Difficulty learning nursery rhymes or playing rhyming games.
Once your child is in school, dyslexia signs and symptoms may become more apparent, including: Reading well below the expected level for age, Problems processing and understanding what he or she hears, Difficulty finding the right word or forming answers to questions, Problems remembering the sequence of things, Difficulty seeing (and occasionally hearing) similarities and differences in letters and words, Inability to sound out the pronunciation of an unfamiliar word, Difficulty spelling, Spending an unusually long time completing tasks that involve reading or writing, Avoiding activities that involve reading.
Dyslexia signs in teens and adults are similar to those in children. Some common dyslexia signs and symptoms in teens and adults include: Difficulty reading, including reading aloud, Slow and labor-intensive reading and writing, Problems spelling, Avoiding activities that involve reading, Mispronouncing names or words, or problems retrieving words, Trouble understanding jokes or expressions that have a meaning not easily understood from the specific words (idioms), such as "piece of cake" meaning "easy", Spending an unusually long time completing tasks that involve reading or writing, Difficulty summarizing a story, Trouble learning a foreign language, Difficulty memorizing, Difficulty doing math problems.
Though most children are ready to learn reading by kindergarten or first grade, children with dyslexia often can't grasp the basics of reading by that time. Talk with your doctor if your child's reading level is below what's expected for his or her age or if you notice other signs of dyslexia.
When dyslexia goes undiagnosed and untreated, childhood reading difficulties continue into adulthood.
Dyslexia tends to run in families. It appears to be linked to certain genes that affect how the brain processes reading and language, as well as risk factors in the environment.
Dyslexia risk factors include: A family history of dyslexia or other learning disabilities, Premature birth or low birth weight, Exposure during pregnancy to nicotine, drugs, alcohol or infection that may alter brain development in the fetus, Individual differences in the parts of the brain that enable reading.
Dyslexia can lead to a number of problems, including:
Trouble learning. Because reading is a skill basic to most other school subjects, a child with dyslexia is at a disadvantage in most classes and may have trouble keeping up with peers.
Social problems. Left untreated, dyslexia may lead to low self-esteem, behavior problems, anxiety, aggression, and withdrawal from friends, parents and teachers.
Problems as adults. The inability to read and comprehend can prevent a child from reaching his or her potential as the child grows up. This can have long-term educational, social and economic consequences.
Children who have dyslexia are at increased risk of having attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and vice versa. ADHD can cause difficulty sustaining attention as well as hyperactivity and impulsive behavior, which can make dyslexia harder to treat.
Signs and symptoms associated with dysphagia may include: Having pain while swallowing (odynophagia), Being unable to swallow, Having the sensation of food getting stuck in your throat or chest or behind your breastbone (sternum), Drooling, Being hoarse, Bringing food back up (regurgitation), Having frequent heartburn, Having food or stomach acid back up into your throat, Unexpectedly losing weight, Coughing or gagging when swallowing, Having to cut food into smaller pieces or avoiding certain foods because of trouble swallowing.
See your doctor if you regularly have difficulty swallowing or if weight loss, regurgitation or vomiting accompanies your dysphagia.
If an obstruction interferes with breathing, call for emergency help immediately. If you're unable to swallow because you feel that the food is stuck in your throat or chest, go to the nearest emergency department.
Swallowing is complex, and a number of conditions can interfere with this process. Sometimes the cause of dysphagia can't be identified. However, dysphagia generally falls into one of the following categories.
Esophageal dysphagia refers to the sensation of food sticking or getting hung up in the base of your throat or in your chest after you've started to swallow. Some of the causes of esophageal dysphagia include:
Achalasia. When your lower esophageal muscle (sphincter) doesn't relax properly to let food enter your stomach, it may cause you to bring food back up into your throat. Muscles in the wall of your esophagus may be weak as well, a condition that tends to worsen over time.
Diffuse spasm. This condition produces multiple high-pressure, poorly coordinated contractions of your esophagus, usually after you swallow. Diffuse spasm affects the involuntary muscles in the walls of your lower esophagus.
Esophageal stricture. A narrowed esophagus (stricture) can trap large pieces of food. Tumors or scar tissue, often caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), can cause narrowing.
Esophageal tumors. Difficulty swallowing tends to get progressively worse when esophageal tumors are present.
Foreign bodies. Sometimes food or another object can partially block your throat or esophagus. Older adults with dentures and people who have difficulty chewing their food may be more likely to have a piece of food become lodged in the throat or esophagus.
Esophageal ring. A thin area of narrowing in the lower esophagus can intermittently cause difficulty swallowing solid foods.
GERD. Damage to esophageal tissues from stomach acid backing up into your esophagus can lead to spasm or scarring and narrowing of your lower esophagus.
Eosinophilic esophagitis. This condition, which may be related to a food allergy, is caused by an overpopulation of cells called eosinophils in the esophagus.
Scleroderma. Development of scar-like tissue, causing stiffening and hardening of tissues, can weaken your lower esophageal sphincter, allowing acid to back up into your esophagus and cause frequent heartburn.
Radiation therapy. This cancer treatment can lead to inflammation and scarring of the esophagus.
Certain conditions can weaken your throat muscles, making it difficult to move food from your mouth into your throat and esophagus when you start to swallow. You may choke, gag or cough when you try to swallow or have the sensation of food or fluids going down your windpipe (trachea) or up your nose. This may lead to pneumonia.
Causes of oropharyngeal dysphagia include:
Neurological disorders. Certain disorders — such as multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy and Parkinson's disease — can cause dysphagia.
Neurological damage. Sudden neurological damage, such as from a stroke or brain or spinal cord injury, can affect your ability to swallow.
Pharyngoesophageal diverticulum (Zenker's diverticulum). A small pouch that forms and collects food particles in your throat, often just above your esophagus, leads to difficulty swallowing, gurgling sounds, bad breath, and repeated throat clearing or coughing.
Cancer. Certain cancers and some cancer treatments, such as radiation, can cause difficulty swallowing.
The following are risk factors for dysphagia:
Aging. Due to natural aging and normal wear and tear on the esophagus and a greater risk of certain conditions, such as stroke or Parkinson's disease, older adults are at higher risk of swallowing difficulties. But, dysphagia isn't considered a normal sign of aging.
Certain health conditions. People with certain neurological or nervous system disorders are more likely to experience difficulty swallowing.
Difficulty swallowing can lead to:
Malnutrition, weight loss and dehydration. Dysphagia can make it difficult to take in adequate nourishment and fluids.
Aspiration pneumonia. Food or liquid entering your airway when you try to swallow can cause aspiration pneumonia, because the food can introduce bacteria to the lungs.
Choking. When food gets stuck in the throat, choking can occur. If food completely blocks the airway, and no one intervenes with a successful Heimlich maneuver, death can occur.
Dystonia affects different people in varying ways. Muscle contractions might:
Begin in a single area, such as your leg, neck or arm. Focal dystonia that begins after age 21 usually starts in the neck, arm or face and tends to remain focal or segmental.
Occur during a specific action, such as handwriting.
Worsen with stress, fatigue or anxiety.
Become more noticeable over time.
Areas of the body that can be affected include:
Neck (cervical dystonia). Contractions cause your head to twist and turn to one side, or pull forward or backward, sometimes causing pain.
Eyelids. Rapid blinking or involuntary spasms cause your eyes to close (blepharospasms) and make it difficult for you to see. Spasms usually aren't painful but might increase when you're in bright light, under stress or interacting with people. Your eyes might feel dry.
Jaw or tongue (oromandibular dystonia). You might experience slurred speech, drooling, and difficulty chewing or swallowing. Oromandibular dystonia can be painful and often occurs in combination with cervical dystonia or blepharospasms.
Voice box and vocal cords (spasmodic dystonia). You might have a tight or whispering voice.
Hand and forearm. Some types of dystonia occur only while you do a repetitive activity, such as writing (writer's dystonia) or playing a specific musical instrument (musician's dystonia).
Early signs of dystonia often are mild, occasional and linked to a specific activity. See your doctor if you're experiencing involuntary muscle contractions.
The exact cause of dystonia isn't known. But it might involve altered nerve-cell communication in several regions of the brain. Some forms of dystonia are inherited.
Dystonia also can be a symptom of another disease or condition, including: Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, Wilson's disease, Traumatic brain injury, Birth injury, Stroke, Brain tumor or certain disorders that develop in some people with cancer (paraneoplastic syndromes), Oxygen deprivation or carbon monoxide poisoning, Infections, such as tuberculosis or encephalitis, Reactions to certain medications or heavy metal poisoning.
Depending on the type of dystonia, complications can include: Physical disabilities that affect your performance of daily activities or specific tasks, Difficulty with vision that affects your eyelids, Difficulty with jaw movement, swallowing or speech, Pain and fatigue, due to constant contraction of your muscles, Depression, anxiety and social withdrawal.
Signs and symptoms of E. coli O157:H7 infection usually begin three or four days after exposure to the bacteria. But you may become ill as soon as one day after exposure to more than a week later. Signs and symptoms include: Diarrhea, which may range from mild and watery to severe and bloody, Stomach cramping, pain or tenderness, Nausea and vomiting, in some people.
Contact your doctor if your diarrhea is persistent, severe or bloody.
Only a few strains of E. coli trigger diarrhea. The E. coli O157:H7 strain belongs to a group of E. coli that produces a powerful toxin that damages the lining of the small intestine. This can cause bloody diarrhea. You develop an E. coli infection when you ingest this strain of bacteria.
Unlike many other disease-causing bacteria, E. coli can cause an infection even if you ingest only small amounts. Because of this, you can be sickened by E. coli from eating a slightly undercooked hamburger or from swallowing a mouthful of contaminated pool water.
Potential sources of exposure include contaminated food or water and person-to-person contact.
The most common way to get an E. coli infection is by eating contaminated food, such as:
Ground beef. When cattle are slaughtered and processed, E. coli bacteria in their intestines can get on the meat. Ground beef combines meat from many different animals, increasing the risk of contamination.
Unpasteurized milk. E. coli bacteria on a cow's udder or on milking equipment can get into raw milk.
Fresh produce. Runoff from cattle farms can contaminate fields where fresh produce is grown. Certain vegetables, such as spinach and lettuce, are particularly vulnerable to this type of contamination.
Human and animal stool may pollute ground and surface water, including streams, rivers, lakes and water used to irrigate crops. Although public water systems use chlorine, ultraviolet light or ozone to kill E. coli, some E. coli outbreaks have been linked to contaminated municipal water supplies.
Private water wells are a greater cause for concern because many don't have a way to disinfect water. Rural water supplies are the most likely to be contaminated. Some people also have been infected with E. coli after swimming in pools or lakes contaminated with stool.
E. coli bacteria can easily travel from person to person, especially when infected adults and children don't wash their hands properly. Family members of young children with E. coli infection are especially likely to get it themselves. Outbreaks have also occurred among children visiting petting zoos and in animal barns at county fairs.
E. coli can affect anyone who is exposed to the bacteria. But some people are more likely to develop problems than are others. Risk factors include:
Age. Young children and older adults are at higher risk of experiencing illness caused by E. coli and more-serious complications from the infection.
Weakened immune systems. People who have weakened immune systems — from AIDS or from drugs to treat cancer or prevent the rejection of organ transplants — are more likely to become ill from ingesting E. coli.
Eating certain types of food. Riskier foods include undercooked hamburger; unpasteurized milk, apple juice or cider; and soft cheeses made from raw milk.
Time of year. Though it's not clear why, the majority of E. coli infections in the U.S. occur from June through September.
Decreased stomach acid levels. Stomach acid offers some protection against E. coli. If you take medications to reduce stomach acid, such as esomeprazole (Nexium), pantoprazole (Protonix), lansoprazole (Prevacid) and omeprazole (Prilosec), you may increase your risk of an E. coli infection.
Most healthy adults recover from E. coli illness within a week. Some people — particularly young children and older adults — may develop a life-threatening form of kidney failure called hemolytic uremic syndrome.
The onset of signs and symptoms of ear infection is usually rapid.
Signs and symptoms common in children include: Ear pain, especially when lying down, Tugging or pulling at an ear, Trouble sleeping, Crying more than usual, Fussiness, Trouble hearing or responding to sounds, Loss of balance, Fever of 100 F (38 C) or higher, Drainage of fluid from the ear, Headache, Loss of appetite.
Common signs and symptoms in adults include: Ear pain, Drainage of fluid from the ear, Trouble hearing.
Signs and symptoms of an ear infection can indicate a number of conditions. It's important to get an accurate diagnosis and prompt treatment. Call your child's doctor if: Symptoms last for more than a day, Symptoms are present in a child less than 6 months of age, Ear pain is severe, Your infant or toddler is sleepless or irritable after a cold or other upper respiratory infection, You observe a discharge of fluid, pus or bloody fluid from the ear.
An ear infection is caused by a bacterium or virus in the middle ear. This infection often results from another illness — cold, flu or allergy — that causes congestion and swelling of the nasal passages, throat and eustachian tubes.
The eustachian tubes are a pair of narrow tubes that run from each middle ear to high in the back of the throat, behind the nasal passages. The throat end of the tubes open and close to: Regulate air pressure in the middle ear, Refresh air in the ear, Drain normal secretions from the middle ear.
Swollen eustachian tubes can become blocked, causing fluids to build up in the middle ear. This fluid can become infected and cause the symptoms of an ear infection.
In children, the eustachian tubes are narrower and more horizontal, which makes them more difficult to drain and more likely to get clogged.
Adenoids are two small pads of tissues high in the back of the nose believed to play a role in immune system activity.
Because adenoids are near the opening of the eustachian tubes, swelling of the adenoids may block the tubes. This can lead to middle ear infection. Swelling and irritation of adenoids is more likely to play a role in ear infections in children because children have relatively larger adenoids compared to adults.
Conditions of the middle ear that may be related to an ear infection or result in similar middle ear problems include:
Otitis media with effusion, or swelling and fluid buildup (effusion) in the middle ear without bacterial or viral infection. This may occur because the fluid buildup persists after an ear infection has gotten better. It may also occur because of some dysfunction or noninfectious blockage of the eustachian tubes.
Chronic otitis media with effusion, occurs when fluid remains in the middle ear and continues to return without bacterial or viral infection. This makes children susceptible to new ear infections and may affect hearing.
Chronic suppurative otitis media, an ear infection that doesn't go away with the usual treatments. This can lead to a hole in the eardrum.
Risk factors for ear infections include:
Age. Children between the ages of 6 months and 2 years are more susceptible to ear infections because of the size and shape of their eustachian tubes and because their immune systems are still developing.
Group child care. Children cared for in group settings are more likely to get colds and ear infections than are children who stay home. The children in group settings are exposed to more infections, such as the common cold.
Infant feeding. Babies who drink from a bottle, especially while lying down, tend to have more ear infections than do babies who are breast-fed.
Seasonal factors. Ear infections are most common during the fall and winter. People with seasonal allergies may have a greater risk of ear infections when pollen counts are high.
Poor air quality. Exposure to tobacco smoke or high levels of air pollution can increase the risk of ear infections.
Alaska Native heritage. Ear infections are more common among Alaska Natives.
Cleft palate. Differences in the bone structure and muscles in children who have cleft palates may make it more difficult for the eustachian tube to drain.
Most ear infections don't cause long-term complications. Ear infections that happen again and again can lead to serious complications:
Impaired hearing. Mild hearing loss that comes and goes is fairly common with an ear infection, but it usually gets better after the infection clears. Ear infections that happen again and again, or fluid in the middle ear, may lead to more-significant hearing loss. If there is some permanent damage to the eardrum or other middle ear structures, permanent hearing loss may occur.
Speech or developmental delays. If hearing is temporarily or permanently impaired in infants and toddlers, they may experience delays in speech, social and developmental skills.
Spread of infection. Untreated infections or infections that don't respond well to treatment can spread to nearby tissues. Infection of the mastoid, the bony protrusion behind the ear, is called mastoiditis. This infection can result in damage to the bone and the formation of pus-filled cysts. Rarely, serious middle ear infections spread to other tissues in the skull, including the brain or the membranes surrounding the brain (meningitis).
Tearing of the eardrum. Most eardrum tears heal within 72 hours. In some cases, surgical repair is needed.
Signs and symptoms of earwax blockage may include: Earache, Feeling of fullness in the affected ear, Ringing or noises in the ear (tinnitus), Decreased hearing in the affected ear, Dizziness, Cough.
If you're experiencing the signs and symptoms of earwax blockage, talk to your doctor.
Signs and symptoms could indicate another condition. You may think you can deal with earwax on your own, but there's no way to know if you have excessive earwax without having someone, usually your doctor, look in your ears. Having signs and symptoms, such as earache or decreased hearing, doesn't necessarily mean you have wax buildup. It's possible you have another medical condition involving your ears that may need attention.
Wax removal is most safely done by a doctor. Your ear canal and eardrum are delicate and can be damaged easily by excess earwax. Don't try to remove earwax yourself with any device placed into your ear canal, especially if you have had ear surgery, have a hole (perforation) in your eardrum, or are having ear pain or drainage.
Children usually have their ears checked as part of any medical examination. If necessary, a doctor can remove excess earwax from your child's ear during an office visit.
The wax in your ears is secreted by glands in the skin that lines the outer half of your ear canals. The wax and tiny hairs in these passages trap dust and other foreign particles that could damage deeper structures, such as your eardrum.
In most people, a small amount of earwax regularly makes its way to the opening of the ear, where it's washed away or falls out as new wax is secreted to replace it. If you secrete an excessive amount of wax or if earwax isn't cleared effectively, it may build up and block your ear canal.
Earwax blockages commonly occur when people try to clean their ears on their own by placing cotton swabs or other items in their ears. This often just pushes wax deeper into the ear, rather than removing it.
Symptoms vary, depending on the type of eating disorder. Anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and binge-eating disorder are the most common eating disorders. Other eating disorders include rumination disorder and avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder.
Anorexia (an-o-REK-see-uh) nervosa — often simply called anorexia — is a potentially life-threatening eating disorder characterized by an abnormally low body weight, intense fear of gaining weight, and a distorted perception of weight or shape. People with anorexia use extreme efforts to control their weight and shape, which often significantly interferes with their health and life activities.
When you have anorexia, you excessively limit calories or use other methods to lose weight, such as excessive exercise, using laxatives or diet aids, or vomiting after eating. Efforts to reduce your weight, even when underweight, can cause severe health problems, sometimes to the point of deadly self-starvation.
Bulimia (boo-LEE-me-uh) nervosa — commonly called bulimia — is a serious, potentially life-threatening eating disorder. When you have bulimia, you have episodes of bingeing and purging that involve feeling a lack of control over your eating. Many people with bulimia also restrict their eating during the day, which often leads to more binge eating and purging.
During these episodes, you typically eat a large amount of food in a short time, and then try to rid yourself of the extra calories in an unhealthy way. Because of guilt, shame and an intense fear of weight gain from overeating, you may force vomiting or you may exercise too much or use other methods, such as laxatives, to get rid of the calories.
If you have bulimia, you're probably preoccupied with your weight and body shape, and may judge yourself severely and harshly for your self-perceived flaws. You may be at a normal weight or even a bit overweight.
When you have binge-eating disorder, you regularly eat too much food (binge) and feel a lack of control over your eating. You may eat quickly or eat more food than intended, even when you're not hungry, and you may continue eating even long after you're uncomfortably full.
After a binge, you may feel guilty, disgusted or ashamed by your behavior and the amount of food eaten. But you don't try to compensate for this behavior with excessive exercise or purging, as someone with bulimia or anorexia might. Embarrassment can lead to eating alone to hide your bingeing.
A new round of bingeing usually occurs at least once a week. You may be normal weight, overweight or obese.
Rumination disorder is repeatedly and persistently regurgitating food after eating, but it's not due to a medical condition or another eating disorder such as anorexia, bulimia or binge-eating disorder. Food is brought back up into the mouth without nausea or gagging, and regurgitation may not be intentional. Sometimes regurgitated food is rechewed and reswallowed or spit out.
The disorder may result in malnutrition if the food is spit out or if the person eats significantly less to prevent the behavior. The occurrence of rumination disorder may be more common in infancy or in people who have an intellectual disability.
This disorder is characterized by failing to meet your minimum daily nutrition requirements because you don't have an interest in eating; you avoid food with certain sensory characteristics, such as color, texture, smell or taste; or you're concerned about the consequences of eating, such as fear of choking. Food is not avoided because of fear of gaining weight.
The disorder can result in significant weight loss or failure to gain weight in childhood, as well as nutritional deficiencies that can cause health problems.
An eating disorder can be difficult to manage or overcome by yourself. Eating disorders can virtually take over your life. If you're experiencing any of these problems, or if you think you may have an eating disorder, seek medical help.
Unfortunately, many people with eating disorders may not think they need treatment. If you're worried about a loved one, urge him or her to talk to a doctor. Even if your loved one isn't ready to acknowledge having an issue with food, you can open the door by expressing concern and a desire to listen.
Be alert for eating patterns and beliefs that may signal unhealthy behavior, as well as peer pressure that may trigger eating disorders. Red flags that may indicate an eating disorder include: Skipping meals or making excuses for not eating, Adopting an overly restrictive vegetarian diet, Excessive focus on healthy eating, Making own meals rather than eating what the family eats, Withdrawing from normal social activities, Persistent worry or complaining about being fat and talk of losing weight, Frequent checking in the mirror for perceived flaws, Repeatedly eating large amounts of sweets or high-fat foods, Use of dietary supplements, laxatives or herbal products for weight loss, Excessive exercise, Calluses on the knuckles from inducing vomiting, Problems with loss of tooth enamel that may be a sign of repeated vomiting, Leaving during meals to use the toilet, Eating much more food in a meal or snack than is considered normal, Expressing depression, disgust, shame or guilt about eating habits, Eating in secret.
If you're worried that your child may have an eating disorder, contact his or her doctor to discuss your concerns. If needed, you can get a referral to a qualified mental health professional with expertise in eating disorders, or if your insurance permits it, contact an expert directly.
The exact cause of eating disorders is unknown. As with other mental illnesses, there may be many causes, such as:
Genetics and biology. Certain people may have genes that increase their risk of developing eating disorders. Biological factors, such as changes in brain chemicals, may play a role in eating disorders.
Psychological and emotional health. People with eating disorders may have psychological and emotional problems that contribute to the disorder. They may have low self-esteem, perfectionism, impulsive behavior and troubled relationships.
Teenage girls and young women are more likely than teenage boys and young men to have anorexia or bulimia, but males can have eating disorders, too. Although eating disorders can occur across a broad age range, they often develop in the teens and early 20s.
Certain factors may increase the risk of developing an eating disorder, including:
Family history. Eating disorders are significantly more likely to occur in people who have parents or siblings who've had an eating disorder.
Other mental health disorders. People with an eating disorder often have a history of an anxiety disorder, depression or obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Dieting and starvation. Dieting is a risk factor for developing an eating disorder. Starvation affects the brain and influences mood changes, rigidity in thinking, anxiety and reduction in appetite. There is strong evidence that many of the symptoms of an eating disorder are actually symptoms of starvation. Starvation and weight loss may change the way the brain works in vulnerable individuals, which may perpetuate restrictive eating behaviors and make it difficult to return to normal eating habits.
Stress. Whether it's heading off to college, moving, landing a new job, or a family or relationship issue, change can bring stress, which may increase your risk of an eating disorder.
Eating disorders cause a wide variety of complications, some of them life-threatening. The more severe or long lasting the eating disorder, the more likely you are to experience serious complications, such as: Serious health problems, Depression and anxiety, Suicidal thoughts or behavior, Problems with growth and development, Social and relationship problems, Substance use disorders, Work and school issues, Death.
Signs and symptoms typically begin abruptly within five to 10 days of infection with Ebola virus or Marburg virus. Early signs and symptoms include: Fever, Severe headache, Joint and muscle aches, Chills, Weakness.
Over time, symptoms become increasingly severe and may include: Nausea and vomiting, Diarrhea (may be bloody), Red eyes, Raised rash, Chest pain and cough, Sore throat, Stomach pain, Severe weight loss, Bruising, Bleeding, usually from the eyes, and when close to death, possible bleeding from the ears, nose and rectum, Internal bleeding.
Ebola virus has been found in African monkeys, chimps and other nonhuman primates. A milder strain of Ebola has been discovered in monkeys and pigs in the Philippines.
Marburg virus has been found in monkeys, chimps and fruit bats in Africa.
Experts suspect that both viruses spread to humans through an infected animal's bodily fluids. Examples include:
Blood. Killing or eating infected animals can spread the viruses. Scientists who have operated on infected animals as part of their research have also caught the virus.
Waste products. Tourists in certain African caves and some underground mine workers have been infected with the Marburg virus, possibly through contact with the feces or urine of infected bats.
People who have Ebola virus or Marburg virus typically don't become contagious until they develop symptoms. The viruses can spread through blood, body fluids, or contaminated items such as bedding, clothing or needles. Family members can be infected as they care for sick relatives or prepare the dead for burial.
Medical personnel can be infected if they don't use specialized personal protective equipment that covers them from head to toe.
There's no evidence that Ebola virus or Marburg virus can be spread via insect bites.
For most people, the risk of getting Ebola virus or Marburg virus is low. The risk increases if you:
Travel to Africa. You're at increased risk if you visit or work in areas where Ebola virus or Marburg virus outbreaks have occurred.
Conduct animal research. People are more likely to contract the Ebola virus or Marburg virus if they conduct animal research with monkeys imported from Africa or the Philippines.
Provide medical or personal care. Family members are often infected as they care for sick relatives. Medical personnel also can be infected if they don't use specialized personal protective equipment that covers them from head to toe.
Prepare people for burial. The bodies of people who have died of Ebola virus or Marburg virus are still contagious. Helping prepare these bodies for burial can increase your risk of getting the viruses.
Both Ebola virus and Marburg virus lead to death for a high number of people who are affected. As the illnesses progress, the viruses can cause: Multiple organ failure, Severe bleeding, Jaundice, Delirium, Seizures, Coma, Shock.
One reason the viruses are so deadly is that they interfere with the immune system's ability to mount a defense. But scientists don't understand why some people recover from Ebola virus and Marburg virus and others don't.
For people who survive, recovery is slow. It may take months to regain weight and strength, and the viruses remain in the body for weeks. People may experience: Hair loss, Sensory changes, Liver inflammation (hepatitis), Weakness, Fatigue, Headaches, Eye inflammation, Testicular inflammation.
Mild forms of Ebstein anomaly might not cause symptoms until later in adulthood. Signs and symptoms might include: Shortness of breath, especially with exertion, Fatigue, Heart palpitations or abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias), A bluish discoloration of the lips and skin caused by low oxygen (cyanosis).
If you or your child has signs or symptoms of heart failure — such as feeling easily fatigued or short of breath, even with normal activity — or if the skin around the lips and nails looks blue or you have swelling of your legs, talk to your doctor. He or she may refer you to a doctor who specializes in congenital heart disease (cardiologist).
Ebstein anomaly is a heart defect that you have at birth (congenital). The cause is unknown. To understand how Ebstein anomaly affects your heart, it helps to know how the heart works to supply your body with blood.
Your heart is made up of four chambers. The two upper chambers (atria) receive blood. The two lower chambers (ventricles) pump blood.
Four valves open and close to let blood flow in one direction through the heart. Each valve consists of two or three strong, thin flaps (leaflets) of tissue. A closed valve prevents blood from flowing to the next chamber or from returning to the previous chamber.
Oxygen-poor blood from your body flows into the right atrium. Blood then flows through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle, which pumps the blood to your lungs. On the other side of your heart, oxygen-rich blood from your lungs flows into the left atrium, through the mitral valve and into the left ventricle, which then pumps the blood to the rest of your body.
The tricuspid valve normally sits between the two right heart chambers (right atrium and right ventricle).
In Ebstein anomaly, the tricuspid valve sits lower than normal in the right ventricle. This makes it so that a portion of the right ventricle becomes part of the right atrium, causing the right atrium to enlarge and not work properly.
Also, the tricuspid valve's leaflets are abnormally formed. This can lead to blood leaking backward into the right atrium (tricuspid valve regurgitation).
The location of the valve and how poorly it's formed varies from person to person. Some people have a mildly abnormal valve. Others have a valve leaks severely.
Common associated heart conditions include:
Holes in the heart. Many people with Ebstein anomaly have a hole between the two upper chambers of the heart called an atrial septal defect or an opening called a patent foramen ovale (PFO). A PFO is a hole between the upper heart chambers that all babies have before birth that usually closes after birth. It can remain open in some people without causing issues.
These holes can decrease the amount of oxygen available in your blood, causing a bluish discoloration of the lips and skin (cyanosis).
Abnormal heartbeats (arrhythmias). An abnormal heart rhythm or rapid heartbeats make is difficult for the heart to work properly, especially when the tricuspid valve is leaking severely. In some cases, a very fast heart rhythm causes fainting spells (syncope).
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome. People with WPW syndrome have an abnormal electrical pathway in the heart that can lead to fast heart rates and fainting spells.
Congenital heart defects, such as Ebstein anomaly, occur as the baby's heart develops in the mother's womb.
Doctors aren't sure what risk factors are associated with the defect. Genetic and environmental factors are believed to play a role. A family history of heart defects or a mother's use of certain medications, such as lithium, during pregnancy might increase the risk of Ebstein anomaly in the child.
Mild Ebstein anomaly may not cause any complications.
However, possible complications of Ebstein anomaly include: Heart failure, Sudden cardiac arrest, Stroke.
Taking a few precautions before playing sports or becoming pregnant may help prevent complications.
If your heart size is nearly normal and you have no heart rhythm disturbances, you can probably participate in most physical activities. Depending on your signs and symptoms, your doctor might recommend that you avoid certain competitive sports, such as football or basketball.
If you're planning on having a baby, talk to your doctor. Many women with mild Ebstein anomaly can safely have children. But pregnancy, labor and delivery put additional strain on your heart. Rarely, severe complications can develop that can cause death to mother or baby. Together, you and your doctor can decide how much monitoring you need throughout pregnancy and childbirth. In some cases, other treatments for your condition or symptoms may be recommended before you become pregnant.
You may not notice any symptoms at first. However, some women who have an ectopic pregnancy have the usual early signs or symptoms of pregnancy — a missed period, breast tenderness and nausea.
If you take a pregnancy test, the result will be positive. Still, an ectopic pregnancy can't continue as normal.
As the fertilized egg grows in the improper place, signs and symptoms become more noticeable.
Often, the first warning signs of an ectopic pregnancy are light vaginal bleeding and pelvic pain.
If blood leaks from the fallopian tube, you may feel shoulder pain or an urge to have a bowel movement. Your specific symptoms depend on where the blood collects and which nerves are irritated.
If the fertilized egg continues to grow in the fallopian tube, it can cause the tube to rupture. Heavy bleeding inside the abdomen is likely. Symptoms of this life-threatening event include extreme lightheadedness, fainting and shock.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any signs or symptoms of an ectopic pregnancy, including: Severe abdominal or pelvic pain accompanied by vaginal bleeding, Extreme lightheadedness or fainting, Shoulder pain.
A tubal pregnancy — the most common type of ectopic pregnancy — happens when a fertilized egg gets stuck on its way to the uterus, often because the fallopian tube is damaged by inflammation or is misshapen. Hormonal imbalances or abnormal development of the fertilized egg also might play a role.
Some things that make you more likely to have an ectopic pregnancy are:
Previous ectopic pregnancy. If you've had this type of pregnancy before, you're more likely to have another.
Inflammation or infection. Sexually transmitted infections, such as gonorrhea or chlamydia, can cause inflammation in the tubes and other nearby organs, and increase your risk of an ectopic pregnancy.
Fertility treatments. Some research suggests that women who have in vitro fertilization (IVF) or similar treatments are more likely to have an ectopic pregnancy. Infertility itself may also raise your risk.
Tubal surgery. Surgery to correct a closed or damaged fallopian tube can increase the risk of an ectopic pregnancy.
Choice of birth control. The chance of getting pregnant while using an intrauterine device (IUD) is rare. However, if you do get pregnant with an IUD in place, it's more likely to be ectopic. Tubal ligation, a permanent method of birth control commonly known as "having your tubes tied," also raises your risk, if you become pregnant after this procedure.
Smoking. Cigarette smoking just before you get pregnant can increase the risk of an ectopic pregnancy. The more you smoke, the greater the risk.
An ectopic pregnancy can cause your fallopian tube to burst open. Without treatment, the ruptured tube can lead to life-threatening bleeding.
Normally when you blink, your eyelids distribute tears evenly across your eyes, keeping the surfaces of the eyes lubricated. These tears drain into small openings on the inner part of your eyelids (puncta).
If you have ectropion, your lower lid pulls away from your eye and tears don't drain properly into the puncta. The resulting signs and symptoms can include:
Watery eyes (excessive tearing). Without proper drainage, your tears may pool and constantly flow over your eyelids.
Excessive dryness. Ectropion can cause your eyes to feel dry, gritty and sandy.
Irritation. Stagnant tears or dryness can irritate your eyes, causing a burning sensation and redness in your eyelids and the whites of your eyes.
Sensitivity to light. Stagnant tears or dry eyes can irritate the surface of the cornea, making you sensitive to light.
See your doctor if your eyes are constantly watering or irritated, or your eyelid seems to be sagging or drooping.
Seek immediate care if you have been diagnosed with ectropion and you experience: Rapidly increasing redness in your eyes, Sensitivity to light, Decreasing vision.
These are signs and symptoms of cornea exposure or ulcers, which can harm your vision.
Ectropion can be caused by:
Muscle weakness. As you age, the muscles under your eyes tend to weaken, and tendons stretch out. These muscles and tendons hold your eyelid taut against your eye. When they weaken, your eyelid can begin to droop.
Facial paralysis. Certain conditions, such as Bell's palsy, and certain types of tumors can paralyze facial nerves and muscles. Facial paralysis that affects eyelid muscles can lead to ectropion.
Scars or previous surgeries. Skin that has been damaged by burns or trauma, such as a dog bite, can affect the way that your eyelid rests against your eye. Previous eyelid surgery (blepharoplasty) can cause ectropion, particularly if a considerable amount of skin was removed from the eyelid at the time of surgery.
Eyelid growths. Benign or cancerous growths on your eyelid can cause the lid to turn outward.
Genetic disorders. Rarely is ectropion present at birth (congenital). When it is, it's usually associated with genetic disorders, such as Down syndrome.
Factors that increase your risk of developing ectropion include:
Age. The most common cause of ectropion is weakening muscle tissue associated with aging.
Previous eye surgeries. People who have had eyelid surgery are at higher risk of developing ectropion later.
Previous cancer, burns or trauma. If you've had spots of skin cancer on your face, facial burns or trauma, you're at higher risk of developing ectropion.
Ectropion leaves your cornea irritated and exposed, making it more susceptible to drying. The result can be abrasions and ulcers on the cornea, which can threaten your vision.
Signs of edema include: Swelling or puffiness of the tissue directly under your skin, especially in your legs or arms, Stretched or shiny skin, Skin that retains a dimple (pits), after being pressed for several seconds, Increased abdominal size.
Make an appointment to see your doctor if you have swelling, stretched or shiny skin, or skin that retains a dimple after being pressed (pitting). See your doctor immediately if you experience: Shortness of breath, Difficulty breathing, Chest pain.
These can be signs of pulmonary edema, which requires prompt treatment.
If you've been sitting for a prolonged period, such as on a long flight, and you develop leg pain and swelling that won't go away, call your doctor. Persistent leg pain and swelling can indicate a blood clot deep in your vein (deep vein thrombosis, or DVT).
Edema occurs when tiny blood vessels in your body (capillaries) leak fluid. The fluid builds up in surrounding tissues, leading to swelling.
Mild cases of edema may result from: Sitting or staying in one position for too long, Eating too much salty food, Having premenstrual signs and symptoms, Being pregnant.
Edema can also be a side effect of some medications, including: High blood pressure medications, Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Steroid drugs, Estrogens, Certain diabetes medications called thiazolidinediones.
In some cases, however, edema may be a sign of a more serious underlying medical condition. Several diseases and conditions may cause edema, including:
Congestive heart failure. If you have congestive heart failure, one or both of your heart's lower chambers lose their ability to pump blood effectively. As a result, blood can back up in your legs, ankles and feet, causing edema. Congestive heart failure can also cause swelling in your abdomen. Sometimes, this condition can cause fluid to accumulate in your lungs (pulmonary edema), which can lead to shortness of breath.
Cirrhosis. Fluid may accumulate in your abdominal cavity (ascites) and in your legs as a result of liver damage (cirrhosis).
Kidney disease. When you have kidney disease, extra fluid and sodium in your circulation may cause edema. The edema associated with kidney disease usually occurs in your legs and around your eyes.
Kidney damage. Damage to the tiny, filtering blood vessels in your kidneys can result in nephrotic syndrome. In nephrotic syndrome, declining levels of protein (albumin) in your blood can lead to fluid accumulation and edema.
Weakness or damage to veins in your legs. If you have chronic venous insufficiency, the one-way valves in your leg veins are weakened or damaged, which allows blood to pool in your leg veins and causes swelling. Sudden onset of swelling in one leg accompanied by pain in your calf muscle can be due to a blood clot (deep vein thrombosis, or DVT) in one of your leg veins. If this occurs, seek medical help immediately.
Inadequate lymphatic system. Your body's lymphatic system helps clear excess fluid from tissues. If this system is damaged — for example, by cancer surgery — the lymph nodes and lymph vessels draining an area may not work correctly, and edema can occur.
Severe, long-term protein deficiency. An extreme lack (deficiency), of protein in your diet over a long period of time can lead to fluid accumulation and edema.
If you are pregnant, your body retains more sodium and water than usual due to the fluid needed by the fetus and placenta. This can increase your risk of developing edema.
Your risk of edema may be increased if you take certain medications, including: High blood pressure medications, Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Steroid drugs, Estrogens, Certain diabetes medications called thiazolidinediones.
A chronic illness — such as congestive heart failure or liver or kidney disease — can increase your risk of edema. Also, surgery can sometimes obstruct a lymph node, leading to swelling in an arm or leg, usually on just one side.
If left untreated, edema can cause: Increasingly painful swelling, Difficulty walking, Stiffness, Stretched skin, which can become itchy and uncomfortable, Increased risk of infection in the swollen area, Scarring between layers of tissue, Decreased blood circulation, Decreased elasticity of arteries, veins, joints and muscles, Increased risk of skin ulcers.
Egg allergy reactions vary from person to person and usually occur soon after exposure to egg. Egg allergy symptoms can include: Skin inflammation or hives — the most common egg allergy reaction, Nasal congestion, runny nose and sneezing (allergic rhinitis), Digestive symptoms, such as cramps, nausea and vomiting, Asthma signs and symptoms such as coughing, wheezing, chest tightness or shortness of breath.
A severe allergic reaction can lead to anaphylaxis, a life-threatening emergency that requires an immediate epinephrine (adrenaline) shot and a trip to the emergency room. Anaphylaxis signs and symptoms include: Constriction of airways, including a swollen throat or a lump in your throat that makes it difficult to breathe, Abdominal pain and cramping, Rapid pulse, Shock, with a severe drop in blood pressure felt as dizziness, lightheadedness or loss of consciousness.
Discuss with your doctor any reaction — no matter how mild — you or your child has to eggs. The severity of egg allergy reactions can vary each time one occurs, so even if a past reaction was mild, the next one could be more serious.
If your doctor thinks you or your child may be at risk of a severe reaction, he or she may prescribe an emergency epinephrine shot to be used if anaphylaxis occurs. The shot comes in a device that makes it easy to deliver, called an autoinjector.
See a doctor if you or your child has signs or symptoms of a food allergy shortly after eating eggs or an egg-containing product. If possible, see the doctor when the allergic reaction is occurring. This may help in making a diagnosis.
If you or your child has signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis, seek immediate emergency treatment and use an autoinjector if one has been prescribed.
An immune system overreaction causes food allergies. For egg allergy, the immune system mistakenly identifies certain egg proteins as harmful. When you or your child comes in contact with egg proteins, immune system cells (antibodies) recognize them and signal the immune system to release histamine and other chemicals that cause allergic signs and symptoms.
Both egg yolks and egg whites contain proteins that can cause allergies, but allergy to egg whites is most common. It's possible for breast-fed infants to have an allergic reaction to egg proteins in breast milk if the mother consumes eggs.
Certain factors can increase the risk of developing egg allergy:
Atopic dermatitis. Children with this type of skin reaction are much more likely to develop a food allergy than are children who don't have skin problems.
Family history. You're at increased risk of a food allergy if one or both of your parents have asthma, food allergy or another type of allergy — such as hay fever, hives or eczema.
Age. Egg allergy is most common in children. With age, the digestive system matures and allergic food reactions are less likely to occur.
The most significant complication of egg allergy is having a severe allergic reaction requiring an epinephrine injection and emergency treatment.
The same immune system reaction that causes egg allergy can also cause other conditions. If you or your child has egg allergy, you or your child may be at increased risk of: Allergies to other foods, such as milk, soy or peanuts, Allergies to pet dander, dust mites or grass pollen, Allergic skin reactions such as atopic dermatitis, Asthma, which in turn increases the risk of having a severe allergic reaction to eggs or other foods.
There are many different types of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, but the most common signs and symptoms include:
Overly flexible joints. Because the connective tissue that holds joints together is looser, your joints can move far past the normal range of motion. Joint pain and dislocations are common.
Stretchy skin. Weakened connective tissue allows your skin to stretch much more than usual. You may be able to pull a pinch of skin up away from your flesh, but it will snap right back into place when you let go. Your skin might also feel exceptionally soft and velvety.
Fragile skin. Damaged skin often doesn't heal well. For example, the stitches used to close a wound often will tear out and leave a gaping scar. These scars may look thin and crinkly.
Symptom severity can vary from person to person and depends on the specific type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome that you have. The most common type is called hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
People who have vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome often share distinctive facial features of a thin nose, thin upper lip, small earlobes and prominent eyes. They also have thin, translucent skin that bruises very easily. In fair-skinned people, the underlying blood vessels are very visible through the skin.
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome can weaken your heart's largest artery (aorta), as well as the arteries to other regions of your body. A rupture of any of these larger blood vessels can be fatal. The vascular type can also weaken the walls of the uterus or large intestines — which also may rupture.
Different types of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are associated with a variety of genetic causes, some of which are inherited and passed on from parent to child. If you have the most common form, hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, there's a 50% chance that you'll pass on the gene to each of your children.
Complications depend on the types of signs and symptoms you have. For example, overly flexible joints can result in joint dislocations and early-onset arthritis. Fragile skin may develop prominent scarring.
People who have vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are at risk of often fatal ruptures of major blood vessels. Some organs, such as the uterus and intestines, also may rupture. Pregnancy can increase the risk of a rupture in the uterus.
If a tick carrying the bacterium that causes ehrlichiosis has been feeding on you for at least 24 hours, the following flu-like signs and symptoms may appear — usually within seven to 14 days of the bite: Mild fever, Headache, Chills, Muscle aches, Nausea, Vomiting, Diarrhea, Fatigue, Loss of appetite, Joint pain, Confusion, Rash, Cough.
Some people infected with ehrlichiosis may have symptoms so mild that they never seek medical attention, and the body fights off the illness on its own. But untreated ehrlichiosis with persistent symptoms can result in an illness serious enough to require hospitalization.
It may take as long as 14 days after a tick bite for you to begin showing signs and symptoms of ehrlichiosis. If you get symptoms within two weeks of a tick bite, see your doctor.
If you experience any of the above symptoms soon after you've been in an area known to have ticks, see your doctor. Be sure to tell your doctor that you recently received a tick bite or visited an area with a high population of ticks.
Ehrlichiosis is caused by ehrlichia bacteria and is transmitted primarily by the Lone Star tick.
Ticks feed on blood, latching onto a host and feeding until they're swollen to many times their normal size. During feeding, ticks that carry disease-producing bacteria can transmit the bacteria to a healthy host. Or they may pick up bacteria themselves if the host, such as a white-tailed deer or a coyote, is infected.
Usually, to get ehrlichiosis, you must be bitten by an infected tick. The bacteria enter your skin through the bite and eventually make their way into your bloodstream.
Before bacteria can be transmitted, a tick must be attached and feeding for at least 24 hours. An attached tick with a swollen appearance may have been feeding long enough to have transmitted bacteria. Removing ticks as soon as possible may prevent infection.
It's also possible that ehrlichiosis may be transmitted through blood transfusions, from mother to fetus, and through direct contact with an infected, slaughtered animal.
Ehrlichiosis spreads when an infected tick, primarily the Lone Star tick, bites you and feeds on you for 24 hours or longer. The following factors may increase your risk of getting tick-borne infections:
Being outdoors in warm weather. Most cases of ehrlichiosis occur in the spring and summer months when populations of the Lone Star tick are at their peak, and people are outside more often.
Living in or visiting an area with a high tick population. You are at greater risk if you are in an area with a high Lone Star tick population. In the United States, Lone Star ticks are most common in southeastern, eastern and south-central states.
Being male. Ehrlichiosis infections are more common in males, possibly because of increased time outdoors for work and recreation.
Without prompt treatment, ehrlichiosis can have serious effects on an otherwise healthy adult or child.
People with weakened immune systems are at an even higher risk of more-serious and potentially life-threatening consequences. Serious complications of untreated infection include: Kidney failure, Respiratory failure, Heart failure, Seizures, Coma.
Eisenmenger syndrome signs and symptoms include: Bluish or grayish skin color (cyanosis), Large, rounded fingernails or toenails (clubbing), Easily tiring and shortness of breath with activity, Shortness of breath while at rest, Chest pain or tightness, Skipped or racing heartbeats (palpitations), Fainting (syncope), Coughing up blood (hemoptysis), Dizziness, Numbness or tingling in the fingers or toes, Headaches, Abdominal swelling.
If you have any signs or symptoms of Eisenmenger syndrome, make an appointment to see your doctor. Even if you haven't previously been diagnosed with a heart defect, symptoms such as cyanosis and shortness of breath are signals that you have a health problem that needs medical attention.
Eisenmenger syndrome develops most often due to a hole between the chambers of your heart. To understand how Eisenmenger syndrome affects your heart and lungs, it's helpful to know how your heart works.
Your heart is divided into four chambers, two on the right and two on the left. In performing its basic job — pumping blood throughout your body — your heart uses its left and right sides for different tasks.
The right side moves blood into vessels that lead to your lungs. In your lungs, oxygen enriches your blood, which circulates to your heart's left side. The left side of your heart pumps blood into a large vessel called the aorta, which circulates blood to the rest of your body.
Valves control the flow of blood into and out of the chambers of your heart. These valves open to allow blood to move to the next chamber or to one of the arteries, and they close to keep blood from flowing backward.
For most people who have Eisenmenger syndrome, the cause of their condition is due to a hole (shunt) between the main blood vessels or chambers of your heart. This shunt is a heart defect you're born with (congenital). Heart defects that can cause Eisenmenger syndrome include:
Ventricular septal defect. This shunt in the wall of tissue that divides the right and left sides of your heart's main pumping chambers (ventricles) is the most common cause of Eisenmenger syndrome.
Atrial septal defect. An atrial septal defect is a shunt in the wall of tissue that divides the right and left sides of the upper chambers of your heart (atria).
Patent ductus arteriosus. This heart defect is an opening between the pulmonary artery that carries oxygen-poor blood to the lungs and the artery that carries oxygen-rich blood to the rest of your body (aorta).
Atrioventricular canal defect. In this heart defect, there's a large hole in the center of the heart where the walls between the upper chambers (atria) and lower chambers (ventricles) meet. Some of the valves in your heart also may not function properly.
For each of these defects, the increased pressure of blood flowing through the shunt increases the pressure in your pulmonary artery. Over time, this increased pressure damages the smaller blood vessels in your lungs.
Eisenmenger syndrome occurs when blood flows backward through the shunt, causing oxygen-rich and oxygen-poor blood to mix. This lowers the oxygen level in your blood (cyanosis), and your red blood cell count increases to try to make up for the lack of oxygen.
Eisenmenger syndrome occurs when a congenital heart defect is not treated or detected early enough to be closed before damage to the lung arteries occurs. If you or your child receives a diagnosis of a heart defect, it's important to start treatment promptly, including having surgeries or procedures to help correct the defect.
A family history of heart defects also increases the risk of a baby being born with a congenital heart defect, including the possibility of developing Eisenmenger syndrome. Talk to your doctor about screening other family members for heart defects if you've been diagnosed with a heart defect or Eisenmenger syndrome.
Regular medical treatment and monitoring is important to manage complications of Eisenmenger syndrome, including:
Low oxygen levels in your blood (cyanosis). The reversed blood flow through your heart lowers the amount of oxygen your body's tissues and organs receive. This causes you to have a lower tolerance for physical activity and your skin to have a bluish or a grayish color.
High red blood cell count (erythrocytosis). Because you aren't getting enough oxygen-rich blood circulating throughout your body, your kidneys release a hormone that increases your number of red blood cells, the cells that carry oxygen throughout your body.
Having too many red blood cells can reduce the blood flow to other organs and increase your risk of developing blood clots.
Arrhythmias. Enlargement and thickening of the walls in the heart, along with low oxygen levels, may cause an irregular heart rhythm (arrhythmia).
Some types of arrhythmias can cause blood to pool in your heart's chambers, where it can clot. If the clot travels out of your heart and blocks an artery, you can have a stroke, heart attack or clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism).
Sudden cardiac arrest. If you develop an arrhythmia as a complication of Eisenmenger syndrome, it's possible the arrhythmia could suddenly stop your heartbeat.
Cardiac arrest is the sudden, unexpected loss of heart function, breathing and consciousness. Without immediate medical attention, you can die of sudden cardiac arrest in minutes.
You can also go into cardiac arrest during or after surgical procedures, usually related to changes in blood pressure caused by anesthesia.
Heart failure. The increased pressure in your heart can cause your heart muscles to weaken, decreasing your heart's pumping effectiveness. Eventually, this can lead to heart failure.
Coughing up blood (hemoptysis). Increased pressure in the lungs and problems with your blood caused by Eisenmenger syndrome can cause life-threatening bleeding into your lungs and airways, causing you to cough up blood and further lowering your blood oxygen level. Bleeding can also occur in other parts of the body.
Stroke. Stroke can occur when a blood clot travels from your heart to your brain. This blood clot may then block a blood vessel in the brain, leading to a stroke.
The high levels of red blood cells in Eisenmenger syndrome also increase your risk of blood clots and stroke.
Kidney problems. Low oxygen levels in your blood may lead to problems with your kidneys. This can also increase your risk of developing gout.
Pregnancy risks. Due to the demands pregnancy puts on a mother's heart and lungs, women who have Eisenmenger syndrome shouldn't become pregnant. If you have Eisenmenger syndrome, pregnancy poses a high risk of death for both you and your baby.
Eisenmenger syndrome is a life-threatening condition. The prognosis for people diagnosed with Eisenmenger syndrome depends on the type of congenital heart defect and other medical conditions. People who are diagnosed with Eisenmenger syndrome can survive as long as age 60 and sometimes longer.
Elevated blood pressure doesn't cause symptoms. The only way to detect it is to keep track of your blood pressure readings. Have your blood pressure checked at each doctor's visit — or check it at home with a home blood pressure monitoring device.
All people age 3 and older should have their blood pressure checked by a doctor at least once a year. You might need more-frequent readings if you have elevated blood pressure or other risk factors for cardiovascular disease.
Any factor that increases pressure against the artery walls can lead to elevated blood pressure. The buildup of fatty deposits in your arteries (atherosclerosis) can lead to high blood pressure.
Besides atherosclerosis, other conditions that can lead to elevated blood pressure or high blood pressure include: Obstructive sleep apnea, Kidney disease, Adrenal disease, Thyroid disease.
Certain medications — including birth control pills, cold remedies, decongestants, over-the-counter pain relievers and some prescription drugs — also can cause blood pressure to rise temporarily. Illegal drugs, such as cocaine and amphetamines, can have the same effect.
Risk factors for elevated blood pressure include:
Being overweight or obese. The greater your body mass, the more blood you need to supply oxygen and nutrients to your tissues. As the amount of blood going through your blood vessels increases, so does the force on your artery walls.
Age. Younger adults are more likely to have elevated blood pressure than are older adults because the risk of hypertension increases as you age. So many older adults have progressed beyond elevated blood pressure to hypertension. Even children can develop elevated blood pressure, especially if they're overweight or obese.
Sex. High blood pressure is more common in men than in women through about age 55. Women are more likely to develop high blood pressure after age 55.
Race. High blood pressure is particularly common among people of African heritage, often developing at an earlier age than it does in white people.
Family history of high blood pressure. If a first-degree relative, such as a parent or sibling, has high blood pressure, you're more likely to develop the condition.
Not being physically active. Not exercising can increase your risk of high blood pressure and increase your risk of being overweight.
Diet high in salt (sodium) or low in potassium. Sodium and potassium are two key nutrients in the way your body regulates your blood pressure. If you have too much sodium or too little potassium in your diet, you're more likely to have high blood pressure.
Tobacco use. Smoking cigarettes, chewing tobacco or being around others who smoke (secondhand smoke) can increase your blood pressure.
Drinking too much alcohol. Alcohol use has been associated with increased blood pressure, particularly in men.
Certain chronic conditions. Kidney disease, diabetes and sleep apnea, among others, can increase the risk of elevated blood pressure.
Although elevated blood pressure and high blood pressure are most common in adults, children can be at risk, too. For some children, kidney or heart problems can cause high blood pressure. But for a growing number of kids, poor lifestyle habits, such as an unhealthy diet, obesity and lack of exercise, contribute to elevated blood pressure and high blood pressure.
Elevated blood pressure is likely to worsen and develop into hypertension. Hypertension can damage your organs and increase the risk of several conditions including a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, aneurysms and kidney failure.
You can have emphysema for many years without noticing any signs or symptoms. The main symptom of emphysema is shortness of breath, which usually begins gradually.
You may start avoiding activities that cause you to be short of breath, so the symptom doesn't become a problem until it starts interfering with daily tasks. Emphysema eventually causes shortness of breath even while you're at rest.
See your doctor if you've had unexplained shortness of breath for several months, especially if it's getting worse or it's interfering with your daily activities. Don't ignore it by telling yourself it's because you're aging or out of shape. Seek immediate medical attention if: You're so short of breath, you can't climb stairs, Your lips or fingernails turn blue or gray with exertion, You're not mentally alert.
The main cause of emphysema is long-term exposure to airborne irritants, including: Tobacco smoke, Marijuana smoke, Air pollution, Chemical fumes and dust.
Rarely, emphysema is caused by an inherited deficiency of a protein that protects the elastic structures in the lungs. It's called alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency emphysema.
Factors that increase your risk of developing emphysema include:
Smoking. Emphysema is most likely to develop in cigarette smokers, but cigar and pipe smokers also are susceptible. The risk for all types of smokers increases with the number of years and amount of tobacco smoked.
Age. Although the lung damage that occurs in emphysema develops gradually, most people with tobacco-related emphysema begin to experience symptoms of the disease between the ages of 40 and 60.
Exposure to secondhand smoke. Secondhand smoke, also known as passive or environmental tobacco smoke, is smoke that you inadvertently inhale from someone else's cigarette, pipe or cigar. Being around secondhand smoke increases your risk of emphysema.
Occupational exposure to fumes or dust. If you breathe fumes from certain chemicals or dust from grain, cotton, wood or mining products, you're more likely to develop emphysema. This risk is even greater if you smoke.
Exposure to indoor and outdoor pollution. Breathing indoor pollutants, such as fumes from heating fuel, as well as outdoor pollutants — car exhaust, for instance — increases your risk of emphysema.
People who have emphysema are also more likely to develop:
Collapsed lung (pneumothorax). A collapsed lung can be life-threatening in people who have severe emphysema, because the function of their lungs is already so compromised. This is uncommon but serious when it occurs.
Heart problems. Emphysema can increase the pressure in the arteries that connect the heart and lungs. This can cause a condition called cor pulmonale, in which a section of the heart expands and weakens.
Large holes in the lungs (bullae). Some people with emphysema develop empty spaces in the lungs called bullae. They can be as large as half the lung. In addition to reducing the amount of space available for the lung to expand, giant bullae can increase your risk of pneumothorax.
Most people with viral encephalitis have mild flu-like symptoms, such as: Headache, Fever, Aches in muscles or joints, Fatigue or weakness.
Sometimes the signs and symptoms are more severe, and might include: Confusion, agitation or hallucinations, Seizures, Loss of sensation or paralysis in certain areas of the face or body, Muscle weakness, Problems with speech or hearing, Loss of consciousness (including coma).
In infants and young children, signs and symptoms might also include: Bulging in the soft spots (fontanels) of an infant's skull, Nausea and vomiting, Body stiffness, Poor feeding or not waking for a feeding, Irritability.
Get immediate care if you are experiencing any of the more-severe symptoms associated with encephalitis. A severe headache, fever and altered consciousness require urgent care.
Infants and young children with any signs or symptoms of encephalitis should receive urgent care.
The exact cause of encephalitis is often unknown. But when a cause is known, the most common is a viral infection. Bacterial infections and noninfectious inflammatory conditions also can cause encephalitis.
There are two main types of encephalitis:
Primary encephalitis. This condition occurs when a virus or other agent directly infects the brain. The infection may be concentrated in one area or widespread. A primary infection may be a reactivation of a virus that had been inactive after a previous illness.
Secondary encephalitis. This condition results from a faulty immune system reaction to an infection elsewhere in the body. Instead of attacking only the cells causing the infection, the immune system also mistakenly attacks healthy cells in the brain. Also known as post-infection encephalitis, secondary encephalitis often occurs two to three weeks after the initial infection.
The viruses that can cause encephalitis include:
Herpes simplex virus (HSV). Both HSV type 1 — associated with cold sores and fever blisters around your mouth — and HSV type 2 — associated with genital herpes — can cause encephalitis. Encephalitis caused by HSV type 1 is rare but can result in significant brain damage or death.
Other herpes viruses. These include the Epstein-Barr virus, which commonly causes infectious mononucleosis, and the varicella-zoster virus, which commonly causes chickenpox and shingles.
Enteroviruses. These viruses include the poliovirus and the coxsackievirus, which usually cause an illness with flu-like symptoms, eye inflammation and abdominal pain.
Mosquito-borne viruses. These viruses can cause infections such as West Nile, La Crosse, St. Louis, western equine and eastern equine encephalitis. Symptoms of an infection might appear within a few days to a couple of weeks after exposure to a mosquito-borne virus.
Tick-borne viruses. The Powassan virus is carried by ticks and causes encephalitis in the Midwestern United States. Symptoms usually appear about a week after a bite from an infected tick.
Rabies virus. Infection with the rabies virus, which is usually transmitted by a bite from an infected animal, causes a rapid progression to encephalitis once symptoms begin. Rabies is a rare cause of encephalitis in the United States.
Childhood infections. Common childhood infections — such as measles (rubeola), mumps and German measles (rubella) — used to be fairly common causes of secondary encephalitis. These causes are now rare in the United States due to the availability of vaccinations for these diseases.
Anyone can develop encephalitis. Factors that may increase the risk include:
Age. Some types of encephalitis are more common or more severe in certain age groups. In general, young children and older adults are at greater risk of most types of viral encephalitis.
Weakened immune system. People who have HIV/AIDS, take immune-suppressing drugs or have another condition causing a weakened immune system are at increased risk of encephalitis.
Geographical regions. Mosquito- or tick-borne viruses are common in particular geographical regions.
Season of the year. Mosquito- and tick-borne diseases tend to be more common in summer in many areas of the United States.
The complications of encephalitis vary, depending on factors such as: Your age, The cause of your infection, The severity of your initial illness, The time from disease onset to treatment.
People with relatively mild illness usually recover within a few weeks with no long-term complications.
Inflammation can injure the brain, possibly resulting in a coma or death.
Other complications — varying greatly in severity — may persist for months or be permanent. These complications can include: Persistent fatigue, Weakness or lack of muscle coordination, Personality changes, Memory problems, Paralysis, Hearing or vision defects, Speech impairments.
Signs and symptoms of encopresis may include: Leakage of stool or liquid stool on underwear, which can be mistaken for diarrhea, Constipation with dry, hard stool, Passage of large stool that clogs or almost clogs the toilet, Avoidance of bowel movements, Long periods of time between bowel movements, Lack of appetite, Abdominal pain, Problems with daytime wetting or bedwetting (enuresis), Repeated bladder infections, typically in girls.
Call your doctor if your child is already toilet trained and starts experiencing one or more of the symptoms listed above.
There are several causes of encopresis, including constipation and emotional issues.
Most cases of encopresis are the result of chronic constipation. In constipation, the child's stool is hard, dry and may be painful to pass. As a result, the child avoids going to the toilet — making the problem worse.
The longer the stool remains in the colon, the more difficult it is for the child to push stool out. The colon stretches, ultimately affecting the nerves that signal when it's time to go to the toilet. When the colon becomes too full, soft or liquid stool may leak out around the retained stool or loss of control over bowel movements may occur.
Some causes of constipation include: Withholding stool due to fear of using the toilet (especially when away from home) or because stools are painful, Not wanting to interrupt play or other activities, Eating too little fiber, Not drinking enough fluids, Drinking too much cow's milk or, rarely, an intolerance to cow's milk — though research results conflict on these issues.
Emotional stress may trigger encopresis. A child may experience stress from: Premature, difficult or conflict-filled toilet training, Changes in the child's life, such as dietary changes, toilet training, starting school or schedule changes, Emotional stressors, for example, the divorce of a parent or the birth of a sibling.
Encopresis is more common in boys. These risk factors may increase the chances of having encopresis: Using medications that may cause constipation, such as cough suppressants, Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), Autism spectrum disorder, Anxiety or depression.
A child who has encopresis may experience a range of emotions, including embarrassment, frustration, shame and anger. If your child is teased by friends or criticized or punished by adults, he or she may feel depressed or have low self-esteem.
Early in chronic kidney disease, you may have no signs or symptoms. As chronic kidney disease progresses to end-stage renal disease, signs and symptoms might include: Nausea, Vomiting, Loss of appetite, Fatigue and weakness, Sleep problems, Changes in how much you urinate, Decreased mental sharpness, Muscle twitches and cramps, Swelling of feet and ankles, Persistent itching, Chest pain, if fluid builds up around the lining of the heart, Shortness of breath, if fluid builds up in the lungs, High blood pressure (hypertension) that's difficult to control.
Signs and symptoms of kidney disease are often nonspecific, meaning they can also be caused by other illnesses. Because your kidneys are highly adaptable and able to compensate for lost function, signs and symptoms may not appear until irreversible damage has occurred.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms of kidney disease.
If you have a medical condition that increases your risk of kidney disease, your doctor is likely to monitor your blood pressure and kidney function with urine and blood tests during regular office visits. Ask your doctor whether these tests are necessary for you.
Kidney disease occurs when a disease or condition impairs kidney function, causing kidney damage to worsen over several months or years.
Diseases and conditions that can lead to kidney disease include: Type 1 or type 2 diabetes, High blood pressure, Glomerulonephritis (gloe-mer-u-low-nuh-FRY-tis), an inflammation of the kidney's filtering units (glomeruli), Interstitial nephritis (in-tur-STISH-ul nuh-FRY-tis), an inflammation of the kidney's tubules and surrounding structures, Polycystic kidney disease, Prolonged obstruction of the urinary tract, from conditions such as enlarged prostate, kidney stones and some cancers, Vesicoureteral (ves-ih-koe-yoo-REE-tur-ul) reflux, a condition that causes urine to back up into your kidneys, Recurrent kidney infection, also called pyelonephritis (pie-uh-low-nuh-FRY-tis).
Certain factors increase the risk that chronic kidney disease will progress more quickly to end-stage renal disease, including: Diabetes with poor blood sugar control, Kidney disease that affects the glomeruli, the structures in the kidneys that filter wastes from the blood, Polycystic kidney disease, Kidney disease after a kidney transplant, High blood pressure, Tobacco use, African-American descent, Male sex, Older age, Lower level of kidney function when your doctor first begins regular measurements of kidney function.
Kidney damage, once it occurs, can't be reversed. Potential complications can affect almost any part of your body and can include: Fluid retention, which could lead to swelling in your arms and legs, high blood pressure, or fluid in your lungs (pulmonary edema), A sudden rise in potassium levels in your blood (hyperkalemia), which could impair your heart's ability to function and may be life-threatening, Heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease, Weak bones and an increased risk of bone fractures, Anemia, Decreased sex drive, erectile dysfunction or reduced fertility, Damage to your central nervous system, which can cause difficulty concentrating, personality changes or seizures, Decreased immune response, which makes you more vulnerable to infection, Pericarditis, an inflammation of the saclike membrane that envelops your heart (pericardium), Pregnancy complications that carry risks for the mother and the developing fetus, Irreversible damage to your kidneys (end-stage kidney disease), eventually requiring either dialysis or a kidney transplant for survival.
Endocarditis may develop slowly or suddenly, depending on what germs are causing the infection and whether you have any underlying heart problems. Endocarditis signs and symptoms can vary from person to person.
Common signs and symptoms of endocarditis include: Flu-like symptoms, such as fever and chills, A new or changed heart murmur, which is the heart sounds made by blood rushing through your heart, Fatigue, Aching joints and muscles, Night sweats, Shortness of breath, Chest pain when you breathe, Swelling in your feet, legs or abdomen.
Endocarditis can also cause symptoms that are more uncommon. These include: Unexplained weight loss, Blood in your urine, which you might be able to see or that your doctor might see when he or she views your urine under a microscope, Tenderness in your spleen, which is an infection-fighting abdominal organ just below your rib cage on the left side of your body, Janeway lesions, which are red spots on the soles of your feet or the palms of your hands, Osler's nodes, which are red, tender spots under the skin of your fingers or toes, Petechiae (puh-TEE-key-e), which are tiny purple or red spots on the skin, whites of your eyes, or inside your mouth.
If you develop signs or symptoms of endocarditis, and if they don't go away, see your doctor as soon as possible — especially if you have risk factors for this serious infection, such as a heart defect or a previous case of endocarditis.
Although less serious conditions can cause similar signs and symptoms, you won't know for sure until you're evaluated by your doctor.
Endocarditis occurs when germs enter your bloodstream, travel to your heart, and attach to abnormal heart valves or damaged heart tissue. Certain types of bacteria cause most cases, but fungi or other microorganisms also may be responsible.
Usually, your immune system destroys harmful bacteria that make it into your bloodstream. Even if bacteria reach your heart, they may pass through without causing an infection. However, bacteria that live in your mouth, throat or other parts of your body, such as your skin or your gut, can sometimes cause serious infections like endocarditis under the right circumstances.
Bacteria, fungi or other germs that cause endocarditis might enter your bloodstream through:
Everyday oral activities. Activities such as brushing your teeth, or other activities that could cause your gums to bleed, can allow bacteria to enter your bloodstream — especially if you don't floss or your teeth and gums aren't healthy.
An infection or other medical condition. Bacteria may spread from an infected area, such as a skin sore. Other medical conditions, such as gum disease, a sexually transmitted infection or certain intestinal disorders — such as inflammatory bowel disease — can also give bacteria the opportunity to enter your bloodstream.
Catheters. Bacteria can enter your body through a catheter — a thin tube that doctors sometimes use to inject or remove fluid from the body. This is more likely to occur if the catheter is in place for a long period of time.
Needles used for tattoos and body piercing. The bacteria that can cause endocarditis can also enter your bloodstream through the needles used for tattooing or body piercing.
Intravenous (IV) illegal drug use. Contaminated needles and syringes are a special concern for people who use illegal intravenous (IV) drugs, such as heroin or cocaine. Often, individuals who use these types of drugs don't have access to clean, unused needles or syringes.
Certain dental procedures. Some dental procedures that can cut your gums may allow bacteria to enter your bloodstream.
Bacteria can more easily attach to the lining of your heart (endocardium), if the lining's surface is rough. You're also more likely to develop endocarditis if you have faulty, diseased or damaged heart valves. However, endocarditis does occasionally occur in previously healthy individuals.
If your heart is healthy, you could be less likely to develop endocarditis, although it is still possible. The germs that cause infection tend to stick to and multiply on damaged or surgically implanted heart valves, or on endocardium that has a rough surface.
People at highest risk of endocarditis are those who have:
Artificial heart valves. Germs are more likely to attach to an artificial (prosthetic) heart valve than to a normal heart valve.
Congenital heart defects. If you were born with certain types of heart defects, such as an irregular heart or abnormal heart valves, your heart may be more susceptible to infection.
A history of endocarditis. Endocarditis can damage heart tissue and valves, increasing the risk of a future heart infection.
Damaged heart valves. Certain medical conditions, such as rheumatic fever or infection, can damage or scar one or more of your heart valves. This can make them more prone to endocarditis.
A history of intravenous (IV) illegal drug use. People who use illegal drugs by injecting them are at a greater risk of endocarditis. The needles used to inject drugs can be contaminated with the bacteria that can cause endocarditis.
In endocarditis, clumps of bacteria and cell fragments form in your heart at the site of the infection. These clumps, called vegetations, can break loose and travel to your brain, lungs, abdominal organs, kidneys or limbs. As a result, endocarditis can cause several major complications, including: Heart problems, such as heart murmur, heart valve damage and heart failure, Stroke, Seizure, Loss of the ability to move part of all of your body (paralysis), Pockets of collected pus (abscesses) that develop in the heart, brain, lungs and other organs, Pulmonary embolism — an infected vegetation that travels to the lungs and blocks a lung artery, Kidney damage, Enlarged spleen.
Signs and symptoms of endometrial cancer may include: Vaginal bleeding after menopause, Bleeding between periods, Pelvic pain.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you experience any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
Doctors don't know what causes endometrial cancer. What's known is that something occurs to create changes (mutations) in the DNA of cells in the endometrium — the lining of the uterus.
The mutation turns normal, healthy cells into abnormal cells. Healthy cells grow and multiply at a set rate, eventually dying at a set time. Abnormal cells grow and multiply out of control, and they don't die at a set time. The accumulating abnormal cells form a mass (tumor). Cancer cells invade nearby tissues and can separate from an initial tumor to spread elsewhere in the body (metastasize).
Factors that increase the risk of endometrial cancer include:
Changes in the balance of female hormones in the body. The ovaries make two main female hormones — estrogen and progesterone. Fluctuations in the balance of these hormones cause changes in the endometrium.
A disease or condition that increases the amount of estrogen, but not the level of progesterone, in your body can increase your risk of endometrial cancer. Examples include irregular ovulation patterns, which might happen in polycystic ovary syndrome, obesity and diabetes. Taking hormones after menopause that contain estrogen but not progesterone increases the risk of endometrial cancer.
A rare type of ovarian tumor that secretes estrogen also can increase the risk of endometrial cancer.
More years of menstruation. Starting menstruation at an early age — before age 12 — or beginning menopause later increases the risk of endometrial cancer. The more periods you've had, the more exposure your endometrium has had to estrogen.
Never having been pregnant. If you've never been pregnant, you have a higher risk of endometrial cancer than someone who has had at least one pregnancy.
Older age. As you get older, your risk of endometrial cancer increases. Endometrial cancer occurs most often after menopause.
Obesity. Being obese increases your risk of endometrial cancer. This may occur because excess body fat alters your body's balance of hormones.
Hormone therapy for breast cancer. Taking the hormone therapy drug tamoxifen for breast cancer can increase the risk of developing endometrial cancer. If you're taking tamoxifen, discuss this risk with your doctor. For most, the benefits of tamoxifen outweigh the small risk of endometrial cancer.
An inherited colon cancer syndrome. Lynch syndrome, also called hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), is a syndrome that increases the risk of colon cancer and other cancers, including endometrial cancer. Lynch syndrome is caused by a gene mutation passed from parents to children. If a family member has been diagnosed with Lynch syndrome, discuss your risk of the genetic syndrome with your doctor. If you've been diagnosed with Lynch syndrome, ask your doctor what cancer screening tests you should undergo.
The primary symptom of endometriosis is pelvic pain, often associated with menstrual periods. Although many experience cramping during their menstrual periods, those with endometriosis typically describe menstrual pain that's far worse than usual. Pain also may increase over time.
Common signs and symptoms of endometriosis include:
Painful periods (dysmenorrhea). Pelvic pain and cramping may begin before and extend several days into a menstrual period. You may also have lower back and abdominal pain.
Pain with intercourse. Pain during or after sex is common with endometriosis.
Pain with bowel movements or urination. You're most likely to experience these symptoms during a menstrual period.
Excessive bleeding. You may experience occasional heavy menstrual periods or bleeding between periods (intermenstrual bleeding).
Infertility. Sometimes, endometriosis is first diagnosed in those seeking treatment for infertility.
Other signs and symptoms. You may experience fatigue, diarrhea, constipation, bloating or nausea, especially during menstrual periods.
The severity of your pain isn't necessarily a reliable indicator of the extent of the condition. You could have mild endometriosis with severe pain, or you could have advanced endometriosis with little or no pain.
Endometriosis is sometimes mistaken for other conditions that can cause pelvic pain, such as pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) or ovarian cysts. It may be confused with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), a condition that causes bouts of diarrhea, constipation and abdominal cramping. IBS can accompany endometriosis, which can complicate the diagnosis.
See your doctor if you have signs and symptoms that may indicate endometriosis.
Endometriosis can be a challenging condition to manage. An early diagnosis, a multidisciplinary medical team and an understanding of your diagnosis may result in better management of your symptoms.
Although the exact cause of endometriosis is not certain, possible explanations include:
Retrograde menstruation. In retrograde menstruation, menstrual blood containing endometrial cells flows back through the fallopian tubes and into the pelvic cavity instead of out of the body. These endometrial cells stick to the pelvic walls and surfaces of pelvic organs, where they grow and continue to thicken and bleed over the course of each menstrual cycle.
Transformation of peritoneal cells. In what's known as the "induction theory," experts propose that hormones or immune factors promote transformation of peritoneal cells — cells that line the inner side of your abdomen — into endometrial-like cells.
Embryonic cell transformation. Hormones such as estrogen may transform embryonic cells — cells in the earliest stages of development — into endometrial-like cell implants during puberty.
Surgical scar implantation. After a surgery, such as a hysterectomy or C-section, endometrial cells may attach to a surgical incision.
Endometrial cell transport. The blood vessels or tissue fluid (lymphatic) system may transport endometrial cells to other parts of the body.
Immune system disorder. A problem with the immune system may make the body unable to recognize and destroy endometrial-like tissue that's growing outside the uterus.
Several factors place you at greater risk of developing endometriosis, such as: Never giving birth, Starting your period at an early age, Going through menopause at an older age, Short menstrual cycles — for instance, less than 27 days, Heavy menstrual periods that last longer than seven days, Having higher levels of estrogen in your body or a greater lifetime exposure to estrogen your body produces, Low body mass index, One or more relatives (mother, aunt or sister) with endometriosis, Any medical condition that prevents the normal passage of menstrual flow out of the body, Reproductive tract abnormalities.
Endometriosis usually develops several years after the onset of menstruation (menarche). Signs and symptoms of endometriosis may temporarily improve with pregnancy and may go away completely with menopause, unless you're taking estrogen.
The main complication of endometriosis is impaired fertility. Approximately one-third to one-half of women with endometriosis have difficulty getting pregnant.
For pregnancy to occur, an egg must be released from an ovary, travel through the neighboring fallopian tube, become fertilized by a sperm cell and attach itself to the uterine wall to begin development. Endometriosis may obstruct the tube and keep the egg and sperm from uniting. But the condition also seems to affect fertility in less-direct ways, such as by damaging the sperm or egg.
Even so, many with mild to moderate endometriosis can still conceive and carry a pregnancy to term. Doctors sometimes advise those with endometriosis not to delay having children because the condition may worsen with time.
Ovarian cancer does occur at higher than expected rates in those with endometriosis. But the overall lifetime risk of ovarian cancer is low to begin with. Some studies suggest that endometriosis increases that risk, but it's still relatively low. Although rare, another type of cancer — endometriosis-associated adenocarcinoma — can develop later in life in those who have had endometriosis.
Signs and symptoms of gynecomastia include: Swollen breast tissue, Breast tenderness.
See your doctor if you have: Swelling, Pain or tenderness, Nipple discharge in one or both breasts.
Gynecomastia is triggered by a decrease in the amount of the hormone testosterone compared with estrogen. The decrease can be caused by conditions that block the effects of testosterone, reduce testosterone or increase your estrogen level.
Several things can upset the hormone balance, including the following.
The hormones testosterone and estrogen control sex characteristics in both men and women. Testosterone controls male traits, such as muscle mass and body hair. Estrogen controls female traits, including the growth of breasts.
Most people think of estrogen as an exclusively female hormone, but men also produce it — though normally in small quantities. Male estrogen levels that are too high or are out of balance with testosterone levels can cause gynecomastia.
Gynecomastia in infants. More than half of male infants are born with enlarged breasts due to the effects of their mother's estrogen. Generally, the swollen breast tissue goes away within two to three weeks after birth.
Gynecomastia during puberty. Gynecomastia caused by hormone changes during puberty is relatively common. In most cases, the swollen breast tissue will go away without treatment within six months to two years.
Gynecomastia in adults. The prevalence of gynecomastia peaks again between the ages of 50 and 69. At least 1 in 4 men in this age group is affected.
A number of medications can cause gynecomastia. These include:
Anti-androgens used to treat an enlarged prostate, prostate cancer and other conditions. Examples include flutamide, finasteride (Proscar, Propecia) and spironolactone (Aldactone, Carospir).
Anabolic steroids and androgens, which are prescribed by doctors for certain conditions or are sometimes used illegally by athletes to build muscle and enhance performance.
AIDS medications. Gynecomastia can develop in men who are HIV-positive and receiving a treatment regimen called highly active antiretroviral therapy. Efavirenz (Sustiva) is more commonly associated with gynecomastia than are other HIV medications.
Anti-anxiety medications, such as diazepam (Valium).
Tricyclic antidepressants.
Antibiotics.
Ulcer medications, such as the over-the-counter drug cimetidine (Tagamet HB).
Cancer treatment.
Heart medications, such as digoxin (Lanoxin) and calcium channel blockers.
Stomach-emptying medications, such as metoclopramide (Reglan).
Substances that can cause gynecomastia include: Alcohol, Amphetamines, used to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, Marijuana, Heroin, Methadone (Methadose, Dolophine).
Several health conditions can cause gynecomastia by affecting the normal balance of hormones. These include:
Hypogonadism. Conditions that interfere with normal testosterone production, such as Klinefelter syndrome or pituitary insufficiency, can be associated with gynecomastia.
Aging. Hormone changes that occur with normal aging can cause gynecomastia, especially in men who are overweight.
Tumors. Some tumors, such as those involving the testes, adrenal glands or pituitary gland, can produce hormones that alter the male-female hormone balance.
Hyperthyroidism. In this condition, the thyroid gland produces too much of the hormone thyroxine.
Kidney failure. About half the people being treated with dialysis experience gynecomastia due to hormonal changes.
Liver failure and cirrhosis. Changes in hormone levels related to liver problems and cirrhosis medications are associated with gynecomastia.
Malnutrition and starvation. When your body is deprived of adequate nutrition, testosterone levels drop while estrogen levels remain the same, causing a hormonal imbalance. Gynecomastia can also happen when normal nutrition resumes.
Plant oils, such as tea tree or lavender, used in shampoos, soaps or lotions have been associated with gynecomastia. This is probably due to their weak estrogenic activity.
Risk factors for gynecomastia include: Adolescence, Older age, Use of anabolic steroids or androgens to enhance athletic performance, Certain health conditions, including liver and kidney disease, thyroid disease, hormonally active tumors, and Klinefelter syndrome.
Gynecomastia has few physical complications, but it can cause psychological or emotional problems caused by appearance.
In some people, an enlarged heart causes no signs or symptoms. Others may have these signs and symptoms: Shortness of breath, Abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia), Swelling (edema).
An enlarged heart is easier to treat when it's detected early, so talk to your doctor if you have concerns about your heart.
Seek emergency medical care if you have any of these signs and symptoms, which may mean you're having a heart attack: Chest pain, Discomfort in other areas of the upper body, including one or both arms, the back, neck, jaw, or stomach, Severe shortness of breath, Fainting.
If you have new signs or symptoms that might be related to your heart, make an appointment to see your doctor.
An enlarged heart can be caused by conditions that cause your heart to pump harder than usual or that damage your heart muscle. Sometimes the heart gets larger and becomes weak for unknown reasons. This is known as idiopathic cardiomegaly.
A heart condition you're born with (congenital), damage from a heart attack or an abnormal heartbeat (arrhythmia) can cause your heart to enlarge. Other conditions associated with an enlarged heart include:
High blood pressure. Your heart may have to pump harder to deliver blood to the rest of your body, enlarging and thickening the muscle.
High blood pressure can cause the left ventricle to enlarge, causing the heart muscle eventually to weaken. High blood pressure may also enlarge the upper chambers of your heart.
Heart valve disease. Four valves in your heart keep blood flowing in the right direction. If the valves are damaged by conditions such as rheumatic fever, a heart defect, infections (infectious endocarditis), an irregular heartbeat (atrial fibrillation) connective tissue disorders, certain medications or radiation treatments for cancer, your heart may enlarge.
Cardiomyopathy. This disease of the heart makes it harder for your heart to pump blood throughout your body. As it progresses, your heart may enlarge to try to pump more blood.
High blood pressure in the artery that connects your heart and lungs (pulmonary hypertension). Your heart may need to pump harder to move blood between your lungs and your heart. As a result, the right side of your heart may enlarge.
Fluid around your heart (pericardial effusion). Accumulation of fluid in the sac that contains your heart may cause your heart to appear enlarged on a chest X-ray.
Blocked arteries in your heart (coronary artery disease). With this condition, fatty plaque in your heart arteries obstruct blood flow through your heart vessels, which can lead to a heart attack. When a section of heart muscle dies, your heart has to pump harder to get adequate blood to the rest of your body, causing it to enlarge.
Low red blood cell count (anemia). Anemia is a condition in which there aren't enough healthy red blood cells to carry adequate oxygen to your tissues. Untreated, chronic anemia can lead to a rapid or irregular heartbeat. Your heart must pump more blood to make up for the lack of oxygen in the blood.
Thyroid disorders. Both an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) and an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) can lead to heart problems, including an enlarged heart.
Excessive iron in the body (hemochromatosis). Hemochromatosis is a disorder in which your body doesn't properly metabolize iron, causing it to build up in various organs, including your heart. This can cause an enlarged left ventricle due to weakening of the heart muscle.
Rare diseases that can affect your heart, such as amyloidosis. Amyloidosis is a condition in which abnormal proteins circulate in the blood and may be deposited in the heart, interfering with your heart's function and causing it to enlarge.
You may be at increased risk of developing an enlarged heart if you have any of the following risk factors:
High blood pressure. Having a blood pressure measurement higher than 140/90 millimeters of mercury.
A family history of enlarged hearts or cardiomyopathy. If an immediate family member, such as a parent or sibling, has had an enlarged heart, you may be more susceptible.
Congenital heart disease. If you're born with a condition that affects the structure of your heart, you may be at increased risk.
Heart valve disease. The heart has four valves — aortic, mitral, pulmonary and tricuspid — that open and close to direct blood flow through your heart. Conditions that damage the valves may cause the heart to enlarge.
The risk of complications from an enlarged heart depends on the part of the heart that is enlarged and the cause.
Complications of an enlarged heart can include:
Heart failure. An enlarged left ventricle, one of the most serious types of enlarged heart, increases the risk of heart failure. In heart failure, your heart muscle weakens, and the ventricles stretch (dilate) to the point that the heart can't pump blood efficiently throughout your body.
Blood clots. Having an enlarged heart may make you more susceptible to forming blood clots in the lining of your heart. If clots enter your bloodstream, they can block blood flow to vital organs, even causing a heart attack or stroke. Clots that develop on the right side of your heart may travel to your lungs, a dangerous condition called a pulmonary embolism.
Heart murmur. For people whose hearts are enlarged, two of the heart's four valves — the mitral and tricuspid valves — may not close properly because they become dilated, leading to a backflow of blood. This flow creates sounds called heart murmurs. Although not necessarily harmful, heart murmurs should be monitored by your doctor.
Cardiac arrest and sudden death. Sometimes an enlarged heart can lead to disruptions in your heart's beating rhythm. Heart rhythms that are too slow to move blood or too fast to allow the heart to beat properly can result in fainting or, in some cases, cardiac arrest or sudden death.
An enlarged liver might not cause symptoms.
When enlarged liver results from liver disease, it might be accompanied by: Abdominal pain, Fatigue, Nausea and vomiting, Yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice).
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have symptoms that worry you.
The liver is a large, football-shaped organ found in the upper right portion of your abdomen. The size of the liver varies with age, sex and body size. Many conditions can cause it to enlarge, including: Cirrhosis, Hepatitis caused by a virus — including hepatitis A, B and C — or caused by infectious mononucleosis, Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, Alcoholic fatty liver disease, A disorder that causes abnormal protein to accumulate in your liver (amyloidosis), A genetic disorder that causes copper to accumulate in your liver (Wilson's disease), A disorder that causes iron to accumulate in your liver (hemachromatosis), A disorder that causes fatty substances to accumulate in your liver (Gaucher's disease), Fluid-filled pockets in the liver (liver cysts), Noncancerous liver tumors, including hemangioma and adenoma, Obstruction of the gallbladder or bile ducts, Toxic hepatitis.
Cancer that begins in another part of the body and spreads to the liver, Leukemia, Liver cancer, Lymphoma.
Blockage of the veins that drain the liver (Budd-Chiari syndrome), Heart failure, Inflammation of the tissue surrounding the heart (pericarditis).
You're more likely to develop an enlarged liver if you have a liver disease. Factors that can increase your risk of liver problems include:
Excessive alcohol use. Drinking large amounts of alcohol can be damaging to your liver.
Large doses of medicines, vitamins or supplements. Taking larger than recommended doses of vitamins, supplements, or over-the-counter (OTC) or prescription medicines can increase your risk of liver damage.
Acetaminophen overdose is the most common cause of acute liver failure in the United States. Besides being the ingredient in OTC pain relievers such as Tylenol, it's in more than 600 medications, both OTC and prescription.
Know what's in the medications you take. Read labels. Look for "acetaminophen," "acetam" or "APAP." Check with your doctor if you're not sure what's too much.
Herbal supplements. Certain supplements, including black cohosh, ma huang and valerian, can increase your risk of liver damage.
Infections. Infectious diseases, viral, bacterial or parasitic, can increase your risk of liver damage.
Hepatitis viruses. Hepatitis A, B and C can cause liver damage.
Poor eating habits. Being overweight increases your risk of liver disease, as does eating unhealthy foods, such as those with excess fat or sugar.
An enlarged spleen may cause: No symptoms in some cases, Pain or fullness in the left upper abdomen that may spread to the left shoulder, Feeling full without eating or after eating only a small amount from the enlarged spleen pressing on your stomach, Anemia, Fatigue, Frequent infections, Easy bleeding.
See your doctor promptly if you have pain in your left upper abdomen, especially if it's severe or the pain gets worse when you take a deep breath.
A number of infections and diseases may cause an enlarged spleen. The enlargement of the spleen may be temporary, depending on treatment. Contributing factors include: Viral infections, such as mononucleosis, Bacterial infections, such as syphilis or an infection of your heart's inner lining (endocarditis), Parasitic infections, such as malaria, Cirrhosis and other diseases affecting the liver, Various types of hemolytic anemia — a condition characterized by early destruction of red blood cells, Blood cancers, such as leukemia and myeloproliferative neoplasms, and lymphomas, such as Hodgkin's disease, Metabolic disorders, such as Gaucher's disease and Niemann-Pick disease, Pressure on the veins in the spleen or liver or a blood clot in these veins.
Your spleen is tucked under your rib cage next to your stomach on the left side of your abdomen. It's a soft, spongy organ that performs several critical jobs. Your spleen: Filters out and destroys old, damaged blood cells, Prevents infection by producing white blood cells (lymphocytes) and acting as a first line of defense against disease-causing organisms, Stores red blood cells and platelets, which help your blood clot.
An enlarged spleen affects each of these vital functions. As your spleen grows larger, it filters normal red blood cells as well as abnormal ones, reducing the number of healthy cells in your bloodstream. It also traps too many platelets.
Excess red blood cells and platelets eventually can clog your spleen and affect normal functioning. An enlarged spleen may even outgrow its own blood supply, which can damage or destroy sections of the organ.
Anyone can develop an enlarged spleen at any age, but certain groups are at higher risk, including: Children and young adults with infections, such as mononucleosis, People who have Gaucher's disease, Niemann-Pick disease, and several other inherited metabolic disorders affecting the liver and spleen, People who live in or travel to areas where malaria is common.
Potential complications of an enlarged spleen are:
Infection. An enlarged spleen can reduce the number of healthy red blood cells, platelets and white cells in your bloodstream, leading to more frequent infections. Anemia and increased bleeding also are possible.
Ruptured spleen. Even healthy spleens are soft and easily damaged, especially in car crashes. The possibility of rupture is much greater when your spleen is enlarged. A ruptured spleen can cause life-threatening bleeding into your abdominal cavity.
The signs and symptoms of entropion result from the friction of your eyelashes and outer eyelid against the surface of your eye. You may experience: The feeling that something is in your eye, Eye redness, Eye irritation or pain, Sensitivity to light and wind, Watery eyes (excessive tearing), Mucous discharge and eyelid crusting.
Seek immediate care if you have received a diagnosis of entropion and you experience: Rapidly increasing redness in your eyes, Pain, Sensitivity to light, Decreasing vision.
These are signs and symptoms of cornea injury, which can harm your vision.
Make an appointment to see your doctor if you feel like you constantly have something in your eye or you notice that some of your eyelashes seem to be turning in toward your eye. If you leave entropion untreated for too long, it can cause permanent damage to your eye. Start using artificial tears and eye-lubricating ointments to protect your eye before your appointment.
Entropion can be caused by:
Muscle weakness. As you age, the muscles under your eyes tend to weaken, and the tendons stretch out. This is the most common cause of entropion.
Scars or previous surgeries. Skin scarred by chemical burns, trauma or surgery can distort the normal curve of the eyelid.
Eye infection. An eye infection called trachoma is common in many developing countries of Africa, Asia, Latin America, the Middle East and Pacific Islands. It can cause scarring of the inner eyelid, leading to entropion and even blindness.
Inflammation. An irritation of the eye caused by dryness or inflammation can lead you to try to relieve the symptoms by rubbing the eyelids or squeezing them shut. This can lead to a spasm of the eyelid muscles and a rolling of the edge of the lid inward against the cornea (spastic entropion).
Developmental complication. When entropion is present at birth (congenital), it may be caused by an extra fold of skin on the eyelid that causes turned-in eyelashes.
Factors that increase your risk of developing entropion include:
Age. The older you are, the greater your chances of developing the condition.
Previous burns or trauma. If you've had a burn or other injury on your face, the resulting scar tissue may put you at higher risk of developing entropion.
Trachoma infection. Because trachoma can scar the inner eyelids, people who have had this infection are more likely to develop entropion.
Corneal irritation and injury are the most serious complications related to entropion because they can lead to permanent vision loss.
Signs and symptoms include:
Adults: Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), Food getting stuck in the esophagus after swallowing (impaction), Chest pain that is often centrally located and does not respond to antacids, Backflow of undigested food (regurgitation).
Children: Difficulty feeding, in infants, Difficulty eating, in children, Vomiting, Abdominal pain, Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), Food getting stuck in the esophagus after swallowing (impaction), No response to GERD medication, Failure to thrive (poor growth, malnutrition and weight loss).
Seek immediate medical attention if you experience chest pain, especially if you also have shortness of breath or jaw or arm pain. These may be symptoms of a heart attack.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you experience severe or frequent eosinophilic esophagitis symptoms. If you take over-the-counter medications for heartburn more than twice a week, see your doctor.
Eosinophils are a normal type of white blood cells present in your digestive tract. However, in eosinophilic esophagitis, you have an allergic reaction to an outside substance. The reaction may occur as follows:
Reaction of the esophagus. The lining of your esophagus reacts to allergens, such as food or pollen.
Multiplication of eosinophils. The eosinophils multiply in your esophagus and produce a protein that causes inflammation.
Damage to the esophagus. Inflammation can lead to scarring, narrowing and formation of excessive fibrous tissue in the lining of your esophagus.
Dysphagia and impaction. You may have difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) or have food become stuck when you swallow (impaction).
Additional symptoms. You may have other symptoms, such as chest pain or stomach pain.
There has been a significant increase in numbers of people diagnosed with eosinophilic esophagitis in the past decade. At first, researchers thought this was due to an increase in awareness among doctors and greater availability of tests. However, studies now suggest that the disease is becoming increasingly common, parallel to the increase in asthma and allergies.
The following risk factors are associated with eosinophilic esophagitis:
Climate. People who live in a cold or dry climate are more likely than those in other climates to be diagnosed with eosinophilic esophagitis.
Season. You're more likely to be diagnosed between the spring and fall, probably because levels of pollen and other allergens are higher and people are more likely to be outdoors.
Sex. Eosinophilic esophagitis is more common in males than in females.
Family history. Doctors think that eosinophilic esophagitis may run in the family (have a genetic component). If your family members have eosinophilic esophagitis, you have a greater chance of being diagnosed.
Allergies and asthma. If you have food or environmental allergies, asthma, atopic dermatitis, or a chronic respiratory disease, you're more likely to be diagnosed with eosinophilic esophagitis.
Age. Originally, eosinophilic esophagitis was thought to be a childhood disease, but now it is known to be common in adults as well. The symptoms differ somewhat between children and adults.
In some people, eosinophilic esophagitis can lead to the following:
Scarring and narrowing of the esophagus. This makes it difficult to swallow and more likely that you will have food get stuck.
Damage to the esophagus. Because of inflammation of the esophagus, endoscopy can cause perforation or tears in the tissue that lines the esophagus. Tearing can also occur in connection with retching that some people experience when they get food stuck in the esophagus.
Epidermoid cyst signs and symptoms include: A small, round bump under the skin, usually on the face, neck or trunk, A tiny blackhead plugging the central opening of the cyst, A thick, yellow, smelly material that sometimes drains from the cyst, Redness, swelling and tenderness in the area, if inflamed or infected.
Most epidermoid cysts don't cause problems or need treatment. See your doctor if you have one or more that: Grows rapidly, Ruptures or becomes painful or infected, Occurs in a spot that's constantly irritated, Bothers you for cosmetic reasons, Is in an unusual location, such as a finger and toe.
The surface of your skin (epidermis) is made up of a thin, protective layer of cells that your body continuously sheds. Most epidermoid cysts form when these cells move deeper into your skin and multiply rather than slough off. Sometimes the cysts form due to irritation or injury of the skin or the most superficial portion of a hair follicle.
The epidermal cells form the walls of the cyst and then secrete the protein keratin into the interior. The keratin is the thick, yellow substance that sometimes drains from the cyst. This abnormal growth of cells may be due to a damaged hair follicle or oil gland in your skin.
Many people refer to epidermoid cysts as sebaceous cysts, but they're different. True sebaceous cysts are less common. They arise from the glands that secrete oily matter that lubricates hair and skin (sebaceous glands).
Nearly anyone can develop one or more epidermoid cysts, but these factors make you more susceptible: Being past puberty, Having certain rare genetic disorders, Injuring the skin.
Potential complications of epidermoid cysts include:
Inflammation. An epidermoid cyst can become tender and swollen, even if it's not infected. An inflamed cyst is difficult to remove. Your doctor is likely to postpone removing it until the inflammation subsides.
Rupture. A ruptured cyst often leads to a boil-like infection that requires prompt treatment.
Infection. Cysts can become infected and painful (abscessed).
Skin cancer. In very rare cases, epidermoid cysts can lead to skin cancer.
Epidermolysis bullosa signs and symptoms vary depending on type. They include: Fragile skin that blisters easily, especially on the hands and feet, Nails that are thick or don't form, Blisters inside the mouth and throat, Thickened skin on the palms and soles of the feet, Scalp blistering, scarring and hair loss (scarring alopecia), Thin-appearing skin (atrophic scarring), Tiny white skin bumps or pimples (milia), Dental problems, such as tooth decay from poorly formed enamel, Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), Itchy, painful skin.
Epidermolysis bullosa blisters may not appear until a toddler first begins to walk or until an older child begins new physical activities that trigger more intense friction on the feet.
Contact your doctor if you or your child develops blisters, particularly if you don't know the reason for them. For infants, severe blistering can be life-threatening.
Seek immediate medical care if you or your child: Has problems swallowing, Has problems breathing, Shows signs of infection, such as warm, red, painful or swollen skin, pus, or a foul odor from a sore, and fever or chills.
Epidermolysis bullosa is usually inherited. The disease gene may be passed on from one parent who has the disease (autosomal dominant inheritance). Or it may be passed on from both parents (autosomal recessive inheritance) or arise as a new mutation in the affected person that can be passed on.
The skin is made up of an outer layer (epidermis) and an underlying layer (dermis). The area where the layers meet is called the basement membrane. The various types of epidermolysis bullosa are largely defined by which layer the blisters form in.
The main types of epidermolysis bullosa are:
Epidermolysis bullosa simplex. This is the most common form. It develops in the outer layer of skin and mainly affects the palms and the feet. The blisters usually heal without scarring.
Junctional epidermolysis bullosa. This type may be severe, with blisters beginning in infancy. A baby with this condition may develop a hoarse-sounding cry from continual blistering and scarring of the vocal cords.
Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. This type is related to a flaw in the gene that helps produce a type of collagen that provides strength to the pig-skinlike dermis layer of the skin. If this substance is missing or doesn't function, the layers of the skin won't join properly.
Having a family history of epidermolysis bullosa is the major risk factor for developing the disorder.
Complications of epidermolysis bullosa may include:
Infection. Blistering skin is vulnerable to bacterial infection.
Sepsis. Sepsis occurs when bacteria from a massive infection enter the bloodstream and spread throughout the body. Sepsis is a rapidly progressing, life-threatening condition that can cause shock and organ failure.
Fusion of fingers and changes in the joints. Severe forms of epidermolysis bullosa can cause fusion of fingers or toes and abnormal bending of joints (contractures). This can affect the function of the fingers, knees and elbows.
Problems with nutrition. Blisters in the mouth can make eating difficult and lead to malnutrition and anemia (such as low iron levels in the blood). Problems with nutrition can also cause delayed wound healing and, in children, slowed growth.
Constipation. Difficulty passing stool may be due to painful blisters in the anal area. It can also be caused by not ingesting enough liquids or high-fiber foods, such as fruits and vegetables.
Dental problems. Tooth decay and problems with tissues inside the mouth are common with some types of epidermolysis bullosa.
Skin cancer. Adolescents and adults with certain types of epidermolysis bullosa are at high risk of developing a type of skin cancer known as squamous cell carcinoma.
Death. Infants with a severe form of junctional epidermolysis bullosa are at high risk of infections and loss of body fluids from widespread blistering. Their survival also may be threatened because of blistering, which may hamper their ability to eat and breathe. Many of these infants die in childhood.
Signs and symptoms of epididymitis might include: A swollen, red or warm scrotum, Testicle pain and tenderness, usually on one side, that usually comes on gradually, Painful urination or an urgent or frequent need to urinate, Discharge from the penis, Pain or discomfort in the lower abdomen or pelvic area, Blood in the semen, Less commonly, fever.
Epididymitis that lasts longer than six weeks or that recurs is considered chronic. Symptoms of chronic epididymitis might come on gradually. Sometimes the cause of chronic epididymitis isn't identified.
Never ignore scrotal pain or swelling, which can be caused by a number of conditions. Some of them require immediate treatment to avoid permanent damage.
If scrotal pain is severe, seek emergency treatment. See a doctor if you have discharge from your penis or pain when you urinate.
Causes of epididymitis include:
STIs. Gonorrhea and chlamydia are the most common causes of epididymitis in young, sexually active men.
Other infections. Bacteria from a urinary tract or prostate infection might spread from the infected site to the epididymis.  Also, viral infections, such as the mumps virus, can result in epididymitis.
Urine in the epididymis (chemical epididymitis). This condition occurs when urine flows backward into the epididymis, possibly because of heavy lifting or straining.
Trauma. A groin injury can cause epididymitis.
Tuberculosis. Rarely, epididymitis can be caused by tuberculosis infection.
Certain sexual behaviors that can lead to STIs put you at risk of sexually transmitted epididymitis, including having: Sex with a partner who has an STI, Sex without a condom, A history of STIs.
Risk factors for nonsexually transmitted epididymitis include: History of prostate or urinary tract infections, History of medical procedures that affect the urinary tract, such as insertion of a urinary catheter or scope into the penis, An uncircumcised penis or an anatomical abnormality of the urinary tract, Prostate enlargement, which increases the risk of bladder infections and epididymitis.
Complications of epididymitis include: Pus-filled infection (abscess) in the scrotum, Epididymo-orchitis, if the condition spreads from your epididymis to your testicle, Rarely, reduced fertility.
In children, signs and symptoms of epiglottitis may develop within a matter of hours, including: Fever, Severe sore throat, Abnormal, high-pitched sound when breathing in (stridor), Difficult and painful swallowing, Drooling, Anxious, restless behavior, Feeling better when sitting up or leaning forward.
For adults, signs and symptoms may develop more slowly, over days rather than hours. Signs and symptoms may include: Severe sore throat, Fever, A muffled or hoarse voice, Abnormal, high-pitched sound when breathing in (stridor), Difficulty breathing, Difficulty swallowing, Drooling.
Epiglottitis is a medical emergency. If you or someone you know suddenly has trouble breathing and swallowing, call your local emergency number or go to the nearest hospital emergency department. Try to keep the person quiet and upright, because this position may make it easier to breathe. Don't try to examine the person's throat yourself. This can make matters worse.
Epiglottitis is caused by an infection or an injury.
In the past, a common cause of swelling and inflammation of the epiglottis and surrounding tissues was infection with Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) bacteria. Hib is responsible for a number of serious conditions, the most common of which is meningitis. Hib is now much less common in developed countries due to Hib immunization in children.
Hib spreads through infected droplets coughed or sneezed into the air. It's possible to harbor Hib in your nose and throat without becoming sick — though you still can spread the bacteria to others.
In adults, other bacteria and viruses also can cause inflammation of the epiglottis, including: Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus), another bacterium that can cause meningitis, pneumonia, ear infection and blood infection (septicemia), Streptococcus A, B and C, a group of bacteria that can cause diseases ranging from strep throat to blood infection, Staphylococcus aureus, a bacterium that causes skin infections and other diseases including pneumonia and toxic shock syndrome.
Physical injury, such as a direct blow to the throat, can cause epiglottitis. So can burns from drinking very hot or caustic liquids.
You also may develop signs and symptoms similar to those of epiglottitis if you: Swallow a chemical that burns your throat, Swallow a foreign object, Smoke drugs, such as crack cocaine.
Certain factors increase the risk of developing epiglottitis, including:
Being male. Epiglottitis affects more males than females.
Having a weakened immune system. If your immune system has been weakened by illness or medication, you're more susceptible to the bacterial infections that may cause epiglottitis.
Lacking adequate vaccination. Delayed or skipped immunizations can leave a child vulnerable to Hib and increases the risk of epiglottitis.
Epiglottitis can cause a number of complications, including:
Respiratory failure. The epiglottis is a small, movable "lid" just above the larynx that prevents food and drink from entering your windpipe. But if the epiglottis becomes swollen — either from infection or from injury — the airway narrows and may become completely blocked. This can lead to respiratory failure — a life-threatening condition in which the level of oxygen in the blood drops dangerously low or the level of carbon dioxide becomes excessively high.
Spreading infection. Sometimes the bacteria that cause epiglottitis cause infections elsewhere in the body, such as pneumonia, meningitis or a bloodstream infection.
Because epilepsy is caused by abnormal activity in the brain, seizures can affect any process your brain coordinates. Seizure signs and symptoms may include: Temporary confusion, A staring spell, Uncontrollable jerking movements of the arms and legs, Loss of consciousness or awareness, Psychic symptoms such as fear, anxiety or deja vu.
Symptoms vary depending on the type of seizure. In most cases, a person with epilepsy will tend to have the same type of seizure each time, so the symptoms will be similar from episode to episode.
Doctors generally classify seizures as either focal or generalized, based on how the abnormal brain activity begins.
When seizures appear to result from abnormal activity in just one area of your brain, they're called focal (partial) seizures. These seizures fall into two categories:
Focal seizures without loss of consciousness. Once called simple partial seizures, these seizures don't cause a loss of consciousness. They may alter emotions or change the way things look, smell, feel, taste or sound. They may also result in involuntary jerking of a body part, such as an arm or leg, and spontaneous sensory symptoms such as tingling, dizziness and flashing lights.
Focal seizures with impaired awareness. Once called complex partial seizures, these seizures involve a change or loss of consciousness or awareness. During a complex partial seizure, you may stare into space and not respond normally to your environment or perform repetitive movements, such as hand rubbing, chewing, swallowing or walking in circles.
Symptoms of focal seizures may be confused with other neurological disorders, such as migraine, narcolepsy or mental illness. A thorough examination and testing are needed to distinguish epilepsy from other disorders.
Seizures that appear to involve all areas of the brain are called generalized seizures. Six types of generalized seizures exist.
Absence seizures. Absence seizures, previously known as petit mal seizures, often occur in children and are characterized by staring into space or subtle body movements such as eye blinking or lip smacking. These seizures may occur in clusters and cause a brief loss of awareness.
Tonic seizures. Tonic seizures cause stiffening of your muscles. These seizures usually affect muscles in your back, arms and legs and may cause you to fall to the ground.
Atonic seizures. Atonic seizures, also known as drop seizures, cause a loss of muscle control, which may cause you to suddenly collapse or fall down.
Clonic seizures. Clonic seizures are associated with repeated or rhythmic, jerking muscle movements. These seizures usually affect the neck, face and arms.
Myoclonic seizures. Myoclonic seizures usually appear as sudden brief jerks or twitches of your arms and legs.
Tonic-clonic seizures. Tonic-clonic seizures, previously known as grand mal seizures, are the most dramatic type of epileptic seizure and can cause an abrupt loss of consciousness, body stiffening and shaking, and sometimes loss of bladder control or biting your tongue.
Seek immediate medical help if any of the following occurs:
The seizure lasts more than five minutes.
Breathing or consciousness doesn't return after the seizure stops.
A second seizure follows immediately.
You have a high fever.
You're experiencing heat exhaustion.
You're pregnant.
You have diabetes.
You've injured yourself during the seizure.
If you experience a seizure for the first time, seek medical advice.
Epilepsy has no identifiable cause in about half the people with the condition. In the other half, the condition may be traced to various factors, including:
Genetic influence. Some types of epilepsy, which are categorized by the type of seizure you experience or the part of the brain that is affected, run in families. In these cases, it's likely that there's a genetic influence.
Researchers have linked some types of epilepsy to specific genes, but for most people, genes are only part of the cause of epilepsy. Certain genes may make a person more sensitive to environmental conditions that trigger seizures.
Head trauma. Head trauma as a result of a car accident or other traumatic injury can cause epilepsy.
Brain conditions. Brain conditions that cause damage to the brain, such as brain tumors or strokes, can cause epilepsy. Stroke is a leading cause of epilepsy in adults older than age 35.
Infectious diseases. Infectious diseases, such as meningitis, AIDS and viral encephalitis, can cause epilepsy.
Prenatal injury. Before birth, babies are sensitive to brain damage that could be caused by several factors, such as an infection in the mother, poor nutrition or oxygen deficiencies. This brain damage can result in epilepsy or cerebral palsy.
Developmental disorders. Epilepsy can sometimes be associated with developmental disorders, such as autism and neurofibromatosis.
Certain factors may increase your risk of epilepsy:
Age. The onset of epilepsy is most common in children and older adults, but the condition can occur at any age.
Family history. If you have a family history of epilepsy, you may be at an increased risk of developing a seizure disorder.
Head injuries. Head injuries are responsible for some cases of epilepsy. You can reduce your risk by wearing a seat belt while riding in a car and by wearing a helmet while bicycling, skiing, riding a motorcycle or engaging in other activities with a high risk of head injury.
Stroke and other vascular diseases. Stroke and other blood vessel (vascular) diseases can lead to brain damage that may trigger epilepsy. You can take a number of steps to reduce your risk of these diseases, including limiting your intake of alcohol and avoiding cigarettes, eating a healthy diet, and exercising regularly.
Dementia. Dementia can increase the risk of epilepsy in older adults.
Brain infections. Infections such as meningitis, which causes inflammation in your brain or spinal cord, can increase your risk.
Seizures in childhood. High fevers in childhood can sometimes be associated with seizures. Children who have seizures due to high fevers generally won't develop epilepsy. The risk of epilepsy increases if a child has a long seizure, another nervous system condition or a family history of epilepsy.
Having a seizure at certain times can lead to circumstances that are dangerous to yourself or others.
Falling. If you fall during a seizure, you can injure your head or break a bone.
Drowning. If you have epilepsy, you're 15 to 19 times more likely to drown while swimming or bathing than the rest of the population because of the possibility of having a seizure while in the water.
Car accidents. A seizure that causes either loss of awareness or control can be dangerous if you're driving a car or operating other equipment.
Many states have driver's license restrictions related to a driver's ability to control seizures and impose a minimum amount of time that a driver be seizure-free, ranging from months to years, before being allowed to drive.
Pregnancy complications. Seizures during pregnancy pose dangers to both mother and baby, and certain anti-epileptic medications increase the risk of birth defects. If you have epilepsy and you're considering becoming pregnant, talk to your doctor as you plan your pregnancy.
Most women with epilepsy can become pregnant and have healthy babies. You'll need to be carefully monitored throughout pregnancy, and medications may need to be adjusted. It's very important that you work with your doctor to plan your pregnancy.
Emotional health issues. People with epilepsy are more likely to have psychological problems, especially depression, anxiety and suicidal thoughts and behaviors. Problems may be a result of difficulties dealing with the condition itself as well as medication side effects.
Other life-threatening complications of epilepsy are uncommon, but may happen, such as:
Status epilepticus. This condition occurs if you're in a state of continuous seizure activity lasting more than five minutes or if you have frequent recurrent seizures without regaining full consciousness in between them. People with status epilepticus have an increased risk of permanent brain damage and death.
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). People with epilepsy also have a small risk of sudden unexpected death. The cause is unknown, but some research shows it may occur due to heart or respiratory conditions.
People with frequent tonic-clonic seizures or people whose seizures aren't controlled by medications may be at higher risk of SUDEP. Overall, about 1 percent of people with epilepsy die of SUDEP.
Erectile dysfunction symptoms might include persistent: Trouble getting an erection, Trouble keeping an erection, Reduced sexual desire.
A family doctor is a good place to start when you have erectile problems. See your doctor if: You have concerns about your erections or you're experiencing other sexual problems such as premature or delayed ejaculation, You have diabetes, heart disease or another known health condition that might be linked to erectile dysfunction, You have other symptoms along with erectile dysfunction.
Male sexual arousal is a complex process that involves the brain, hormones, emotions, nerves, muscles and blood vessels. Erectile dysfunction can result from a problem with any of these. Likewise, stress and mental health concerns can cause or worsen erectile dysfunction.
Sometimes a combination of physical and psychological issues causes erectile dysfunction. For instance, a minor physical condition that slows your sexual response might cause anxiety about maintaining an erection. The resulting anxiety can lead to or worsen erectile dysfunction.
In many cases, erectile dysfunction is caused by something physical. Common causes include: Heart disease, Clogged blood vessels (atherosclerosis), High cholesterol, High blood pressure, Diabetes, Obesity, Metabolic syndrome — a condition involving increased blood pressure, high insulin levels, body fat around the waist and high cholesterol, Parkinson's disease, Multiple sclerosis, Certain prescription medications, Tobacco use, Peyronie's disease — development of scar tissue inside the penis, Alcoholism and other forms of substance abuse, Sleep disorders, Treatments for prostate cancer or enlarged prostate, Surgeries or injuries that affect the pelvic area or spinal cord, Low testosterone.
The brain plays a key role in triggering the series of physical events that cause an erection, starting with feelings of sexual excitement. A number of things can interfere with sexual feelings and cause or worsen erectile dysfunction. These include: Depression, anxiety or other mental health conditions, Stress, Relationship problems due to stress, poor communication or other concerns.
As you get older, erections might take longer to develop and might not be as firm. You might need more direct touch to your penis to get and keep an erection.
Various risk factors can contribute to erectile dysfunction, including: Medical conditions, particularly diabetes or heart conditions, Tobacco use, which restricts blood flow to veins and arteries, can — over time — cause chronic health conditions that lead to erectile dysfunction, Being overweight, especially if you're obese, Certain medical treatments, such as prostate surgery or radiation treatment for cancer, Injuries, particularly if they damage the nerves or arteries that control erections, Medications, including antidepressants, antihistamines and medications to treat high blood pressure, pain or prostate conditions, Psychological conditions, such as stress, anxiety or depression, Drug and alcohol use, especially if you're a long-term drug user or heavy drinker.
Complications resulting from erectile dysfunction can include: An unsatisfactory sex life, Stress or anxiety, Embarrassment or low self-esteem, Relationship problems, The inability to get your partner pregnant.
Signs and symptoms of esophageal cancer include: Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), Weight loss without trying, Chest pain, pressure or burning, Worsening indigestion or heartburn, Coughing or hoarseness.
Early esophageal cancer typically causes no signs or symptoms.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
If you've been diagnosed with Barrett's esophagus, a precancerous condition caused by chronic acid reflux, your risk of esophageal cancer is higher. Ask your doctor what signs and symptoms to watch for that may signal that your condition is worsening.
Screening for esophageal cancer may be an option for people with Barrett's esophagus. If you have Barrett's esophagus, discuss the pros and cons of screening with your doctor.
It's not exactly clear what causes esophageal cancer.
Esophageal cancer occurs when cells in the esophagus develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. The changes make cells grow and divide out of control. The accumulating abnormal cells form a tumor in the esophagus that can grow to invade nearby structures and spread to other parts of the body.
Esophageal cancer is classified according to the type of cells that are involved. The type of esophageal cancer you have helps determine your treatment options. Types of esophageal cancer include:
Adenocarcinoma. Adenocarcinoma begins in the cells of mucus-secreting glands in the esophagus. Adenocarcinoma occurs most often in the lower portion of the esophagus. Adenocarcinoma is the most common form of esophageal cancer in the United States, and it affects primarily white men.
Squamous cell carcinoma. The squamous cells are flat, thin cells that line the surface of the esophagus. Squamous cell carcinoma occurs most often in the upper and middle portions of the esophagus. Squamous cell carcinoma is the most prevalent esophageal cancer worldwide.
Other rare types. Some rare forms of esophageal cancer include small cell carcinoma, sarcoma, lymphoma, melanoma and choriocarcinoma.
It's thought that chronic irritation of your esophagus may contribute to the changes that cause esophageal cancer. Factors that cause irritation in the cells of your esophagus and increase your risk of esophageal cancer include: Having gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), Smoking, Having precancerous changes in the cells of the esophagus (Barrett's esophagus), Being obese, Drinking alcohol, Having bile reflux, Having difficulty swallowing because of an esophageal sphincter that won't relax (achalasia), Having a steady habit of drinking very hot liquids, Not eating enough fruits and vegetables, Undergoing radiation treatment to the chest or upper abdomen.
As esophageal cancer advances, it can cause complications, such as:
Obstruction of the esophagus. Cancer may make it difficult for food and liquid to pass through your esophagus.
Pain. Advanced esophageal cancer can cause pain.
Bleeding in the esophagus. Esophageal cancer can cause bleeding. Though bleeding is usually gradual, it can be sudden and severe at times.
Signs and symptoms of esophageal spasms include:
Squeezing pain in your chest. The pain is often intense, and you might mistake it for heart pain (angina).
Difficulty swallowing solids and liquids, sometimes related to swallowing specific substances, such as red wine or extremely hot or cold liquids.
The feeling that an object is stuck in your throat.
The return of food and liquids back up your esophagus (regurgitation).
The squeezing chest pain associated with esophageal spasms can also be caused by a heart attack. If you experience squeezing chest pain, seek immediate medical care.
It's not clear what causes esophageal spasms. However, they appear to be related to abnormal functioning of nerves that control the muscles you use when you swallow.
A healthy esophagus normally moves food into your stomach through a series of coordinated muscle contractions. Esophageal spasms make it difficult for the muscles in the walls of your lower esophagus to coordinate in order to move food to your stomach.
There are two types of esophageal spasms — distal esophageal spasm and hypercontractile esophagus, also referred to as jackhammer esophagus.
There are no known risk factors for esophageal spasms.
Esophageal varices usually don't cause signs and symptoms unless they bleed. Signs and symptoms of bleeding esophageal varices include: Vomiting large amounts of blood, Black, tarry or bloody stools, Lightheadedness, Loss of consciousness in severe cases.
Your doctor might suspect esophageal varices if you have signs of liver disease, including: Yellow coloration of your skin and eyes (jaundice), Easy bleeding or bruising, Fluid buildup in your abdomen (ascites).
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have signs or symptoms that worry you. If you've been diagnosed with liver disease, ask your doctor about your risk of esophageal varices and what you can do to reduce your risk. Also ask your doctor whether you should get a procedure to check for esophageal varices.
If you've been diagnosed with esophageal varices, your doctor is likely to instruct you to watch for signs of bleeding. Bleeding esophageal varices are an emergency. Call 911 or your local emergency services right away if you have bloody vomit or bloody stools.
Esophageal varices sometimes form when blood flow to your liver is blocked, most often by scar tissue in the liver caused by liver disease. The blood flow begins to back up, increasing pressure within the large vein (portal vein) that carries blood to your liver.
This increased pressure (portal hypertension) forces the blood to seek other pathways through smaller veins, such as those in the lowest part of the esophagus. These thin-walled veins balloon with the added blood. Sometimes the veins rupture and bleed.
Causes of esophageal varices include:
Severe liver scarring (cirrhosis). A number of liver diseases — including hepatitis infection, alcoholic liver disease, fatty liver disease and a bile duct disorder called primary biliary cirrhosis — can result in cirrhosis.
Blood clot (thrombosis). A blood clot in the portal vein or in a vein that feeds into the portal vein (splenic vein) can cause esophageal varices.
Parasitic infection. Schistosomiasis is a parasitic infection found in parts of Africa, South America, the Caribbean, the Middle East and East Asia. The parasite can damage the liver, as well as the lungs, intestine, bladder and other organs.
Although many people with advanced liver disease develop esophageal varices, most won't have bleeding. Esophageal varices are more likely to bleed if you have:
High portal vein pressure. The risk of bleeding increases as the pressure in the portal vein increases (portal hypertension).
Large varices. The larger the esophageal varices, the more likely they are to bleed.
Red marks on the varices. When viewed through a thin, flexible tube (endoscope) passed down your throat, some esophageal varices show long, red streaks or red spots. These marks indicate a high risk of bleeding.
Severe cirrhosis or liver failure. Most often, the more severe your liver disease, the more likely esophageal varices are to bleed.
Continued alcohol use. Your risk of variceal bleeding is far greater if you continue to drink than if you stop, especially if your disease is alcohol related.
If you've had bleeding from esophageal varices before, you're more likely to have varices that bleed again.
The most serious complication of esophageal varices is bleeding. Once you've had a bleeding episode, your risk of another bleeding episode greatly increases. If you lose enough blood, you can go into shock, which can lead to death.
Common signs and symptoms of esophagitis include: Difficult swallowing, Painful swallowing, Chest pain, particularly behind the breastbone, that occurs with eating, Swallowed food becoming stuck in the esophagus (food impaction), Heartburn, Acid regurgitation.
In infants and young children, particularly those too young to explain their discomfort or pain, signs of esophagitis may include: Feeding difficulties, Failure to thrive.
Most signs and symptoms of esophagitis can be caused by a number of different conditions affecting the digestive system. See your doctor if signs or symptoms: Last more than a few days, Don't improve or go away with over-the-counter antacids, Are severe enough to make eating difficult, Are accompanied by flu signs and symptoms, such as headache, fever and muscle aches.
Get emergency care if you: Experience pain in your chest that lasts more than a few minutes, Suspect you have food lodged in your esophagus, Have a history of heart disease and experience chest pain, Experience pain in your mouth or throat when you eat, Have shortness of breath or chest pain that occurs shortly after eating, Vomit large amounts, often have forceful vomiting, have trouble breathing after vomiting or have vomit that is yellow or green, looks like coffee grounds, or contains blood.
Esophagitis is generally categorized by the conditions that cause it. In some cases, more than one factor may be causing esophagitis.
A valve-like structure called the lower esophageal sphincter usually keeps the acidic contents of the stomach out of the esophagus. If this valve opens when it shouldn't or doesn't close properly, the contents of the stomach may back up into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux). Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a condition in which this backflow of acid is a frequent or ongoing problem. A complication of GERD is chronic inflammation and tissue damage in the esophagus.
Eosinophils (e-o-SIN-o-fils) are white blood cells that play a key role in allergic reactions. Eosinophilic esophagitis occurs with a high concentration of these white blood cells in the esophagus, most likely in response to an allergy-causing agent (allergen) or acid reflux or both.
In many cases, this type of esophagitis may be triggered by foods such as milk, eggs, wheat, soy, peanuts, beans, rye and beef. However, conventional allergy testing does not reliably identify these culprit foods.
People with eosinophilic esophagitis may have other nonfood allergies. For example, sometimes inhaled allergens, such as pollen, may be the cause.
Lymphocytic esophagitis (LE) is an uncommon esophageal condition in which there are an increased number of lymphocytes in the lining of the esophagus. LE may be related to eosinophilic esophagitis or to GERD.
Several oral medications may cause tissue damage if they remain in contact with the lining of the esophagus for too long. For example, if you swallow a pill with little or no water, the pill itself or residue from the pill may remain in the esophagus. Drugs that have been linked to esophagitis include: Pain-relieving medications, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve, others), Antibiotics, such as tetracycline and doxycycline, Potassium chloride, which is used to treat potassium deficiency, Bisphosphonates, including alendronate (Fosamax), a treatment for weak and brittle bones (osteoporosis), Quinidine, which is used to treat heart problems.
A bacterial, viral or fungal infection in tissues of the esophagus may cause esophagitis. Infectious esophagitis is relatively rare and occurs most often in people with poor immune system function, such as people with HIV/AIDS or cancer.
A fungus normally present in the mouth called Candida albicans is a common cause of infectious esophagitis. Such infections are often associated with poor immune system function, diabetes, cancer, or the use of steroid or antibiotic medications.
Risk factors for esophagitis vary depending on the different causes of the disorder.
Factors that increase the risk of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) — and therefore are factors in reflux esophagitis — include the following: Eating immediately before going to bed, Dietary factors such as excess alcohol, caffeine, chocolate and mint-flavored foods, Excessively large and fatty meals, Smoking, Extra weight, including from pregnancy.
A number of foods may worsen symptoms of GERD or reflux esophagitis: Tomato-based foods, Citrus fruits, Caffeine, Alcohol, Spicy foods, Garlic and onions, Chocolate, Mint-flavored foods.
Risk factors for eosinophilic esophagitis, or allergy-related esophagitis, may include: A history of certain allergic reactions, including allergic rhinitis, asthma and atopic dermatitis, A family history of eosinophilic esophagitis.
Factors that may increase the risk of drug-induced esophagitis are generally related to issues that prevent quick and complete passage of a pill into the stomach. These factors include: Swallowing a pill with little or no water, Taking drugs while lying down, Taking drugs right before sleep, probably due in part to the production of less saliva and swallowing less during sleep, Older age, possibly because of age-related changes to the muscles of the esophagus or a decreased production of saliva, Large or oddly shaped pills.
Risk factors for infectious esophagitis often relate to medications, such as steroids and antibiotics. People with diabetes also are at increased risk of candida esophagitis in particular.
Other causes of infectious esophagitis may relate to poor immune system function. This may be due to an immune disorder, HIV/AIDS or certain cancers. Also, certain cancer treatments and drugs that block immune system reactions to transplanted organs (immunosuppressants) may increase the risk of infectious esophagitis.
Left untreated, esophagitis can lead to changes in the structure of the esophagus. Possible complications include: Scarring or narrowing (stricture) of the esophagus, Tearing of the esophagus lining tissue from retching (if food gets stuck) or during endoscopy (due to inflammation), Barrett's esophagus, characterized by changes to the cells lining the esophagus, increasing your risk of esophageal cancer.
You may not have any noticeable symptoms of essential thrombocythemia. The first indication you have the disorder may be the development of a blood clot. Clots can develop anywhere in your body, but with essential thrombocythemia they occur most often in your brain, hands and feet.
Signs and symptoms depend on where the clot forms. They include: Headache, Dizziness or lightheadedness, Chest pain, Fainting, Temporary vision changes, Numbness or tingling of the hands and feet, Redness, throbbing and burning pain in the hands and feet.
Less commonly, essential thrombocythemia may cause bleeding, especially if your platelet count is more than 1 million platelets per microliter of blood. Bleeding may take the form of: Nosebleeds, Bruising, Bleeding from your mouth or gums, Bloody stool.
Essential thrombocythemia is a type of chronic myeloproliferative disorder. That means your bone marrow, the spongy tissue inside your bones, makes too many of a certain type of cell. In the case of essential thrombocythemia, the bone marrow makes too many cells that create platelets.
It's not clear what causes this to happen. About 90% of people with the disorder have a gene mutation contributing to the disease.
If an underlying condition such as an infection or iron deficiency causes a high platelet count, it's called secondary thrombocytosis. Compared with essential thrombocythemia, secondary thrombocytosis causes less risk of blood clots and bleeding.
Essential thrombocythemia can lead to a variety of potentially life-threatening complications.
If a blood clot occurs in the arteries that supply the brain, it may cause a stroke or a transient ischemic attack (TIA). A TIA (mini-stroke) is a temporary interruption of blood flow to part of the brain.
Signs and symptoms of both a stroke and a TIA develop suddenly and include: Weakness or numbness of your face, arm or leg, usually on one side of your body, Difficulty speaking or understanding speech, Blurred, double or decreased vision.
Seek medical attention immediately if you develop signs or symptoms of a stroke.
Less commonly, essential thrombocythemia can cause clots in the arteries that supply blood to your heart. Signs and symptoms of a heart attack include: Pressure, fullness or a squeezing pain in the center of your chest lasting more than a few minutes, Pain extending to your shoulder, arm, back, teeth or jaw, Shortness of breath, Sweating or clammy skin.
Seek medical attention immediately if you develop signs or symptoms of a heart attack.
Rarely, essential thrombocythemia may progress to these potentially life-threatening diseases:
Acute myelogenous leukemia. This is a type of white blood cell and bone marrow cancer that progresses rapidly.
Myelofibrosis. This progressive disorder results in bone marrow scarring, leading to severe anemia and enlargement of your liver and spleen.
Most women who have essential thrombocythemia have normal, healthy pregnancies. But uncontrolled thrombocythemia can lead to miscarriage and other complications. Your risk of complications may be reduced with regular checkups and medication, so be sure to have your doctor regularly monitor your condition.
Essential tremor signs and symptoms: Begin gradually, usually more prominently on one side of the body, Worsen with movement, Usually occur in the hands first, affecting one hand or both hands, Can include a "yes-yes" or "no-no" motion of the head, May be aggravated by emotional stress, fatigue, caffeine or temperature extremes.
Many people associate tremors with Parkinson's disease, but the two conditions differ in key ways:
Timing of tremors. Essential tremor of the hands usually occurs when you use your hands. Tremors from Parkinson's disease are most prominent when your hands are at your sides or resting in your lap.
Associated conditions. Essential tremor doesn't cause other health problems, but Parkinson's disease is associated with stooped posture, slow movement and shuffling gait. However, people with essential tremor sometimes develop other neurological signs and symptoms, such as an unsteady gait (ataxia).
Parts of body affected. Essential tremor mainly involves your hands, head and voice. Parkinson's disease tremors usually start in your hands, and can affect your legs, chin and other parts of your body.
About half of essential tremor cases appear to result from a genetic mutation. This form is referred to as familial tremor. It isn't clear what causes essential tremor in people without a known genetic mutation.
Known risk factors for essential tremor include:
Genetic mutation. The inherited variety of essential tremor (familial tremor) is an autosomal dominant disorder. A defective gene from just one parent is needed to pass on the condition.
If you have a parent with a genetic mutation for essential tremor, you have a 50 percent chance of developing the disorder yourself.
Age. Essential tremor is more common in people age 40 and older.
Essential tremor isn't life-threatening, but symptoms often worsen over time. If the tremors become severe, you might find it difficult to: Hold a cup or glass without spilling, Eat normally, Put on makeup or shave, Talk, if your voice box or tongue is affected, Write legibly.
Esthesioneuroblastoma symptoms include: Losing the sense of smell, Frequent nosebleeds, Difficulty breathing through the nose.
As it grows, the cancer may cause eye pain, loss of vision, ear pain and headaches.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that concern you.
The exact cause of esthesioneuroblastoma has not been found. In general, cancer begins with a genetic mutation that allows normal, healthy cells to continue growing without responding to the signals to stop, which is unlike what normal cells do. Cancer cells grow and multiply out of control. The accumulating abnormal cells form a mass (tumor).
Signs and symptoms of Ewing sarcoma include: Pain, swelling or tenderness near the affected area, Bone pain, Unexplained tiredness, Fever with no known cause, Losing weight without trying.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you or your child experiences any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes Ewing sarcoma.
Doctors know that Ewing sarcoma begins when a cell develops changes in its DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The changes tell the cell to multiply quickly and to go on living when healthy cells would normally die. The result is a mass (tumor) of abnormal cells that can invade and destroy healthy body tissue. The abnormal cells can break away and spread (metastasize) throughout the body.
In Ewing sarcoma, the DNA changes most often affect a gene called EWSR1. If your doctor suspects that you have Ewing sarcoma, your cancer cells may be tested to look for changes in this gene.
Risk factors for Ewing sarcoma include:
Your age. Ewing sarcoma can occur at any age, but it is more likely to occur in children and teenagers.
Your ancestry. Ewing sarcoma is more common in people of European ancestry. It's much less common in people of African and East Asian ancestry.
Complications of Ewing sarcoma and its treatment include:
Cancer that spreads (metastasizes). Ewing sarcoma can spread from where it started to other areas, making treatment and recovery more difficult. Ewing sarcoma most often spreads to the lungs and to other bones.
Long-term treatment side effects. The aggressive treatments needed to control Ewing sarcoma can cause substantial side effects, both in the short and long term. Your health care team can help you manage the side effects that happen during treatment and provide you with a list of side effects to watch for in the years after treatment.
These headaches: Are usually described as throbbing, Occur during or after strenuous exercise, Affect both sides of the head in most cases.
These headaches may cause: The same symptoms as primary exercise headaches, Vomiting, Loss of consciousness, Double vision, Neck rigidity.
Primary exercise headaches typically last between five minutes and 48 hours, while secondary exercise headaches usually last at least a day and sometimes linger for several days or longer.
If you experience a headache during or after exercise, consult your doctor. Call your doctor right away if the headache begins abruptly or if it's your first headache of this type.
The exact cause of primary exercise headaches is unknown. One theory is that strenuous exercise dilates blood vessels inside the skull.
Secondary exercise headaches are caused by an underlying problem, such as: Bleeding in the area between the brain and the thin membranes that cover the brain (subarachnoid hemorrhage), Abnormalities in a blood vessel leading to or within the brain, Cancerous or noncancerous tumors, Obstruction of cerebrospinal fluid flow, Sinus infection, Structural abnormalities in the head, neck or spine.
You may be at greater risk of exercise headaches if you: Exercise in hot weather, Exercise at high altitude, Have a personal or family history of migraine.
Signs and symptoms of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction may begin during or soon after exercise. These symptoms may last for 60 minutes or longer if left untreated. The signs and symptoms may include: Coughing, Wheezing, Shortness of breath, Chest tightness or pain, Fatigue during exercise, Poorer than expected athletic performance, Avoidance of activity (a sign primarily among young children).
See your doctor if you experience any signs or symptoms of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction. A number of conditions can cause similar symptoms, making it important to get a prompt and accurate diagnosis.
Get emergency medical treatment if symptoms are getting worse, such as: Shortness of breath or wheezing that is quickly increasing, making it a struggle to breathe, No improvement even after using a prescription inhaler for asthma attacks.
It's not clear what causes exercise-induced bronchoconstriction. There may be more than one biological process involved. People with exercise-induced bronchoconstriction have inflammation and may have excess mucus production after strenuous exercise.
Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction is more likely to occur in:
People with asthma. About 90 percent of people with asthma have exercise-induced bronchoconstriction. However, the condition can occur in people without asthma too.
Elite athletes. Although anyone can experience exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, it's more common in high-level athletes.
Factors that may increase the risk of the condition or act as triggers include: Cold air, Dry air, Air pollution, Chlorine in swimming pools, Chemicals used with ice rink resurfacing equipment, Activities with extended periods of deep breathing, such as long-distance running, swimming or soccer.
Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction that is not treated can result in: A lack of beneficial exercise, Poor performance in activities you would otherwise enjoy, Serious or life-threatening breathing difficulties, particularly among people with poorly managed asthma.
The pain of external compression headaches is often described as moderate, constant pressure. It hurts most in the area where the object is pressing on your head. The pain might worsen the longer the headwear is worn.
It's usually not necessary to see a doctor for a compression headache because it goes away, usually within an hour of removing whatever is causing the pressure.
Seek medical attention only if your headache continues after you remove the object.
External compression headaches are caused by headwear that places pressure on the head — including tight hats, helmets, headbands and goggles.
The headaches are believed to result from pressure on pain receptors or pain fibers that transmit sensation from the face to the brain (trigeminal nerve) or on nerves in the back of the head (occipital nerves).
External compression headaches can affect anyone who uses headwear.
With prolonged pressure, an external compression headache might trigger a migraine in people who tend to have them.
Symptoms of eye floaters may include: Small shapes in your vision that appear as dark specks or knobby, transparent strings of floating material, Spots that move when you move your eyes, so when you try to look at them, they move quickly out of your visual field, Spots that are most noticeable when you look at a plain bright background, such as a blue sky or a white wall, Small shapes or strings that eventually settle down and drift out of the line of vision.
Contact an eye specialist immediately if you notice: Many more eye floaters than usual, A sudden onset of new floaters, Flashes of light in the same eye as the floaters, Darkness on any side or sides of your vision (peripheral vision loss).
These painless symptoms could be caused by a retinal tear, with or without a retinal detachment — a sight-threatening condition that requires immediate attention.
Eye floaters may be caused by the normal aging process or as a result from other diseases or conditions:
Age-related eye changes. As you age, the vitreous, or jelly-like substance filling your eyeballs and helping them to maintain their round shape, changes. Over time, the vitreous partially liquefies — a process that causes it to pull away from the eyeball's interior surface. As the vitreous shrinks and sags, it clumps and gets stringy. This debris blocks some of the light passing through the eye, casting tiny shadows on your retina that are seen as floaters.
Inflammation in the back of the eye. Posterior uveitis is inflammation in the layers of the uvea in the back of the eye. This condition can cause the release of inflammatory debris into the vitreous that are seen as floaters. Posterior uveitis may be caused by infection, inflammatory diseases or other causes.
Bleeding in the eye. Bleeding into the vitreous can have many causes, including diabetes, hypertension, blocked blood vessels and injury. Blood cells are seen as floaters.
Torn retina. Retinal tears can occur when a sagging vitreous tugs on the retina with enough force to tear it. Without treatment, a retinal tear may lead to retinal detachment — an accumulation of fluid behind the retina that causes it to separate from the back of your eye. Untreated retinal detachment can cause permanent vision loss.
Eye surgeries and eye medications. Certain medications that are injected into the vitreous can cause air bubbles to form. These bubbles are seen as shadows until your eye absorbs them. Certain vitreoretinal surgeries add silicone oil bubbles into the vitreous that can also be seen as floaters.
Factors that can increase your risk of floaters include: Age over 50, Nearsightedness, Eye trauma, Complications from cataract surgery, Diabetic retinopathy, Eye inflammation.
Eye melanoma may not cause signs and symptoms. When they do occur, signs and symptoms of eye melanoma can include: A sensation of flashes or specks of dust in your vision (floaters), A growing dark spot on the iris, A change in the shape of the dark circle (pupil) at the center of your eye, Poor or blurry vision in one eye, Loss of peripheral vision.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you. Sudden changes in your vision signal an emergency, so seek immediate care in those situations.
It's not clear what causes eye melanoma.
Doctors know that eye melanoma occurs when errors develop in the DNA of healthy eye cells. The DNA errors tell the cells to grow and multiply out of control, so the mutated cells go on living when they would normally die. The mutated cells accumulate in the eye and form an eye melanoma.
Eye melanoma most commonly develops in the cells of the middle layer of your eye (uvea). The uvea has three parts and each can be affected by eye melanoma: The iris, which is the colored part in the front of the eye, The choroid layer, which is the layer of blood vessels and connective tissue between the sclera and the retina at the back of the uvea, The ciliary body, which is in the front of the uvea and secretes the transparent liquid (aqueous humor) into the eye..
Eye melanoma can also occur on the outermost layer on the front of the eye (conjunctiva), in the socket that surrounds the eyeball and on the eyelid, though these types of eye melanoma are very rare.
Risk factors for primary melanoma of the eye include:
Light eye color. People with blue eyes or green eyes have a greater risk of melanoma of the eye.
Being white. White people have a greater risk of eye melanoma than do people of other races.
Age. The risk of eye melanoma increases with age.
Certain inherited skin disorders. A condition called dysplastic nevus syndrome, which causes abnormal moles, may increase your risk of developing melanoma on your skin and in your eye.
In addition, people with abnormal skin pigmentation involving the eyelids and adjacent tissues and increased pigmentation on their uvea — known as ocular melanocytosis — also have an increased risk of developing eye melanoma.
Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light. The role of ultraviolet exposure in eye melanoma is unclear. There's some evidence that exposure to UV light, such as light from the sun or from tanning beds, may increase the risk of eye melanoma.
Certain genetic mutations. Certain genes passed from parents to children may increase the risk of eye melanoma.
Complications of eye melanoma may include:
Increasing pressure within the eye (glaucoma). A growing eye melanoma may cause glaucoma. Signs and symptoms of glaucoma may include eye pain and redness, as well as blurry vision.
Vision loss. Large eye melanomas often cause vision loss in the affected eye and can cause complications, such as retinal detachment, that also cause vision loss.
Small eye melanomas can cause some vision loss if they occur in critical parts of the eye. You may have difficulty seeing in the center of your vision or on the side. Very advanced eye melanomas can cause complete vision loss.
Eye melanoma that spreads beyond the eye. Eye melanoma can spread outside of the eye and to distant areas of the body, including the liver, lungs and bones.
Eyestrain signs and symptoms include: Sore, tired, burning or itching eyes, Watery or dry eyes, Blurred or double vision, Headache, Sore neck, shoulders or back, Increased sensitivity to light, Difficulty concentrating, Feeling that you cannot keep your eyes open.
See your doctor if self-care steps don't relieve your eyestrain.
Common causes of eyestrain include: Looking at digital device screens, Reading without pausing to rest your eyes, Driving long distances and doing other activities involving extended focus, Being exposed to bright light or glare, Straining to see in very dim light, Having an underlying eye problem, such as dry eyes or uncorrected vision (refractive error), Being stressed or fatigued, Being exposed to dry moving air from a fan, heating or air-conditioning system.
Extended use of computers and other digital devices is one of the most common causes of eyestrain. The American Optometric Association calls this computer vision syndrome, or digital eyestrain. People who look at screens two or more hours in a row every day have the greatest risk of this condition.
Computer use strains eyes more than reading print material because people tend to: Blink less while using computers (blinking is key to moistening the eyes), View digital screens at less than ideal distances or angles, Use devices that have glare or reflection, Use devices with poor contrast between the text and the background.
In some cases, an underlying eye problem, such as eye muscle imbalance or uncorrected vision, can cause or worsen computer eyestrain.
Some other factors that can make the condition worse include: Glare on your screen, Poor posture, Setup of your computer workstation, Circulating air, such as from air conditioning or a nearby fan.
Eyestrain doesn't have serious or long-term consequences, but it can be aggravating and unpleasant. It can make you tired and reduce your ability to concentrate.
Factitious disorder symptoms involve mimicking or producing illness or injury or exaggerating symptoms or impairment to deceive others. People with the disorder go to great lengths to hide their deception, so it may be difficult to realize that their symptoms are actually part of a serious mental health disorder. They continue with the deception, even without receiving any visible benefit or reward or when faced with objective evidence that doesn't support their claims.
Factitious disorder signs and symptoms may include:
Clever and convincing medical or psychological problems Extensive knowledge of medical terms and diseases, Vague or inconsistent symptoms, Conditions that get worse for no apparent reason, Conditions that don't respond as expected to standard therapies, Seeking treatment from many different doctors or hospitals, which may include using a fake name, Reluctance to allow doctors to talk to family or friends or to other health care professionals, Frequent stays in the hospital, Eagerness to have frequent testing or risky operations, Many surgical scars or evidence of numerous procedures, Having few visitors when hospitalized, Arguing with doctors and staff.
Factitious disorder imposed on another (previously called Munchausen syndrome by proxy) is when someone falsely claims that another person has physical or psychological signs or symptoms of illness, or causes injury or disease in another person with the intention of deceiving others.
People with this disorder present another person as sick, injured or having problems functioning, claiming that medical attention is needed. Usually this involves a parent harming a child. This form of abuse can put a child in serious danger of injury or unnecessary medical care.
Because people with factitious disorder become experts at faking symptoms and diseases or inflicting real injuries upon themselves, it may be hard for health care professionals and loved ones to know if illnesses are real or not.
People with factitious disorder make up symptoms or cause illnesses in several ways, such as:
Exaggerating existing symptoms. Even when an actual medical or psychological condition exists, they may exaggerate symptoms to appear sicker or more impaired than is true.
Making up histories. They may give loved ones, health care professionals or support groups a false medical history, such as claiming to have had cancer or AIDS. Or they may falsify medical records to indicate an illness.
Faking symptoms. They may fake symptoms, such as stomach pain, seizures or passing out.
Causing self-harm. They may make themselves sick, for example, by injecting themselves with bacteria, milk, gasoline or feces. They may injure, cut or burn themselves. They may take medications, such as blood thinners or drugs for diabetes, to mimic diseases. They may also interfere with wound healing, such as reopening or infecting cuts.
Tampering. They may manipulate medical instruments to skew results, such as heating up thermometers. Or they may tamper with lab tests, such as contaminating their urine samples with blood or other substances.
People with factitious disorder may be well aware of the risk of injury or even death as a result of self-harm or the treatment they seek, but they can't control their behaviors and they're unlikely to seek help. Even when confronted with objective proof — such as a videotape — that they're causing their illness, they often deny it and refuse psychiatric help.
If you think a loved one may be exaggerating or faking health problems, it may help to attempt a gentle conversation about your concerns. Try to avoid anger, judgment or confrontation. Also try to reinforce and encourage more healthy, productive activities rather than focusing on dysfunctional beliefs and behaviors. Offer support and caring and, if possible, help in finding treatment.
If your loved one causes self-inflicted injury or attempts suicide, call 911 or emergency medical help or, if you can safely do so, take him or her to an emergency room immediately.
The cause of factitious disorder is unknown. However, the disorder may be caused by a combination of psychological factors and stressful life experiences.
Several factors may increase the risk of developing factitious disorder, including: Childhood trauma, such as emotional, physical or sexual abuse, A serious illness during childhood, Loss of a loved one through death, illness or abandonment, Past experiences during a time of sickness and the attention it brought, A poor sense of identity or self-esteem, Personality disorders, Depression, Desire to be associated with doctors or medical centers, Work in the health care field.
Factitious disorder is considered rare, but it's not known how many people have the disorder. Some people use fake names to avoid detection, some visit many different hospitals and doctors, and some are never identified — all of which make it difficult to get a reliable estimate.
People with factitious disorder are willing to risk their lives to be seen as sick. They frequently have other mental health disorders as well. As a result, they face many possible complications, including: Injury or death from self-inflicted medical conditions, Severe health problems from infections or unnecessary surgery or other procedures, Loss of organs or limbs from unnecessary surgery, Alcohol or other substance abuse, Significant problems in daily life, relationships and work, Abuse when the behavior is inflicted on another.
The factor V Leiden mutation does not itself cause any symptoms. Since factor V Leiden is a risk for developing blood clots in the leg or lungs, the first indication that you have the disorder may be the development of an abnormal blood clot.
Some clots do no damage and disappear on their own. Others can be life-threatening. Symptoms of a blood clot depend on what part of your body is affected.
This is known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT), which most commonly occurs in the legs. A DVT may not cause any symptoms. If signs and symptoms do occur, they can include: Pain, Swelling, Redness, Warmth.
Known as a pulmonary embolism, this occurs when a portion of a DVT breaks free and travels through the right side of your heart to your lung, where it blocks blood flow. This can be a life-threatening situation. Signs and symptoms may include: Sudden shortness of breath, Chest pain when breathing in, A cough that produces bloody or blood-streaked sputum, Rapid heartbeat.
Seek medical attention immediately if you have signs or symptoms of either a DVT or a pulmonary embolism.
If you have factor V Leiden, you inherited either one copy or, rarely, two copies of the defective gene. Inheriting one copy slightly increases your risk of developing blood clots. Inheriting two copies — one from each parent — significantly increases your risk of developing blood clots.
A family history of factor V Leiden increases your risk of inheriting the disorder. The disorder is most common in people who are white and of European descent.
People who have inherited factor V Leiden from only one parent have a 5 percent chance of developing an abnormal blood clot by age 65. Factors that increase this risk include:
Two faulty genes. Inheriting the genetic mutation from both parents instead of just one can significantly increase your risk of abnormal blood clots.
Immobility. Extended periods of immobility, such as sitting during a long airplane flight, can increase the risk of leg clots.
Estrogens. Oral contraceptives, hormone replacement therapy and pregnancy can make you more likely to develop blood clots.
Surgeries or injuries. Surgeries or injuries such as broken bones can increase your risk of abnormal blood clots.
Non-O blood type. Abnormal blood clots are more common in people who have blood types of A, B or AB compared with those with blood type O.
Factor V Leiden can cause blood clots in the legs (deep vein thrombosis) and lungs (pulmonary embolism). These blood clots can be life-threatening.
The main sign of FAP is hundreds or even thousands of polyps growing in your colon and rectum, usually starting by your mid-teens. The polyps are nearly 100 percent certain to develop into colon cancer or rectal cancer by the time you're in your 40s.
Familial adenomatous polyposis is caused by a defect in a gene that's usually inherited from a parent. But some people develop the abnormal gene that causes the condition.
Your risk of familial adenomatous polyposis is higher if you have a parent, child, brother, or sister with the condition.
In addition to colon cancer, familial adenomatous polyposis can cause other complications:
Duodenal polyps. These polyps grow in the upper part of your small intestine and may become cancerous. But with careful monitoring, duodenal polyps can often be detected and removed before cancer develops.
Periampullary polyps. These polyps occur where the bile and pancreas ducts enter the duodenum (ampulla). Periampullary polyps might become cancerous but can often be detected and removed before cancer develops.
Gastric fundic polyps. These polyps grow in the lining of your stomach.
Desmoids. These noncancerous masses can arise anywhere in the body but often develop in the stomach area (abdomen). Desmoids can cause serious problems if they grow into nerves or blood vessels or exert pressure on other organs in your body.
Other cancers. Rarely, FAP can cause cancer to develop in your thyroid gland, central nervous system, adrenal glands, liver or other organs.
Noncancerous (benign) skin tumors.
Benign bone growths (osteomas).
Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE). These are benign pigment changes in the retina of your eye.
Dental abnormalities. These include extra teeth or teeth that don't come in.
Low numbers of red blood cells (anemia).
High cholesterol is a common medical condition, but it's often the result of unhealthy lifestyle choices, and thus preventable and treatable. With familial hypercholesterolemia, a person's risk of high cholesterol is higher because a defect (mutation) in a gene changes how the body processes cholesterol. This mutation prevents the body from removing low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, the "bad" cholesterol, from the blood. As a result, plaques can cause your arteries to narrow and harden, increasing the risk of heart disease. Genetic testing can reveal whether you have this mutation.
These gene mutations are passed from parent to child. To have the condition, children need to inherit an altered copy of the gene from one parent. Most people with familial hypercholesterolemia have one affected gene and one normal gene. In rare cases, a person inherits an affected copy from both parents, which can lead to a more severe form of the condition.
Familial hypercholesterolemia is caused by a gene that's passed down from one or both parents. People who have this condition are born with it. This defect prevents the body from ridding itself of the type of cholesterol that can build up in your arteries and cause heart disease. This type of cholesterol is called low-density lipoprotein but it's also commonly known as LDL or bad cholesterol. LDL cholesterol can cause your arteries to get hard and narrow. This increases your risk of a heart attack and heart disease.
The risk of familial hypercholesterolemia is higher if one or both of your parents have the gene defect that causes it. Most people who have the condition got one affected gene. But in rare cases, a child can get the affected gene from both parents. This can cause a more severe form of the condition.
Signs and symptoms of familial Mediterranean fever usually begin during childhood. They occur in bouts called attacks that last one to three days. Arthritic attacks may last for weeks or months.
Signs and symptoms of familial Mediterranean fever include: Fever, Abdominal pain, Chest pain, Achy, swollen joints, A red rash on your legs, especially below your knees, Muscle aches, A swollen, tender scrotum.
Between attacks, you'll likely feel normal. Symptom-free periods may be as short as a few days or as long as several years.
If you or your child experiences sudden worrisome signs or symptoms, such as shortness of breath or passing out, call 911 or emergency medical help.
See your doctor if you or your child has a sudden fever accompanied by pain in the abdomen, chest and joints.
Familial Mediterranean fever is caused by a gene mutation that's passed from parents to children. The gene mutation causes problems in regulating inflammation in the body.
In people with familial Mediterranean fever, the mutation occurs in a gene called MEFV. Many different mutations in MEFV are linked to familial Mediterranean fever. Some mutations may cause very severe cases, while others may result in milder signs and symptoms.
Factors that may increase the risk of familial Mediterranean fever include:
Having a family history of the disease. If you have a family history of familial Mediterranean fever, your risk of the disease is increased.
Being of Mediterranean ancestry. If your family can trace its history to the Mediterranean region, your risk of the disease may be increased. Familial Mediterranean fever can affect people in any ethnic group, but it may be more likely in people of North African, Jewish, Arab, Armenian, Turkish, Greek or Italian descent.
Complications can occur if familial Mediterranean fever isn't treated. Complications can include:
Abnormal protein in the blood. During attacks of familial Mediterranean fever, your body may produce an abnormal protein (amyloid A). The protein can accumulate in your body and cause organ damage (amyloidosis).
Kidney damage. Amyloidosis can damage the kidneys, causing nephrotic syndrome. Nephrotic syndrome occurs when your kidneys' filtering systems (glomeruli) are damaged. People with this condition may lose large amounts of protein in their urine. Nephrotic syndrome can lead to blood clots in your kidneys (renal vein thrombosis) or kidney failure.
Infertility in women. Inflammation caused by familial Mediterranean fever may also affect the female reproductive organs, causing infertility.
Joint pain. Arthritis is common in people with familial Mediterranean fever. The most commonly affected joints are the knees, ankles, hips and elbows.
Farsightedness may mean: Nearby objects may appear blurry, You need to squint to see clearly, You have eyestrain, including burning eyes, and aching in or around the eyes, You have general eye discomfort or a headache after doing close tasks, such as reading, writing, computer work or drawing, for a time.
If your degree of farsightedness is pronounced enough that you can't perform a task as well as you wish, or if your quality of vision detracts from your enjoyment of activities, see an eye doctor. He or she can determine the degree of your farsightedness and advise you of options to correct your vision.
Since it may not always be readily apparent that you're having trouble with your vision, the American Academy of Ophthalmology recommends the following intervals for regular eye exams:
If you're at high risk of certain eye diseases, such as glaucoma, get a dilated eye exam every one to two years, starting at age 40.
If you don't wear glasses or contacts, have no symptoms of eye trouble, and are at a low risk of developing eye diseases, such as glaucoma, get an eye exam at the following intervals: An initial exam at 40, Every two to four years between ages 40 and 54, Every one to three years between ages 55 and 64, Every one to two years beginning at age 65.
If you wear glasses or contacts or you have a health condition that affects the eyes, such as diabetes, you'll likely need to have your eyes checked regularly. Ask your eye doctor how frequently you need to schedule your appointments. But, if you notice problems with your vision, schedule an appointment with your eye doctor as soon as possible, even if you've recently had an eye exam. Blurred vision, for example, may suggest you need a prescription change, or it could be a sign of another problem.
Children need to be screened for eye disease and have their vision tested by a pediatrician, an ophthalmologist, an optometrist or another trained screener at the following ages and intervals. Age 6 months, Age 3 years, Before first grade and every two years during school years, at well-child visits, or through school or public screenings.
Your eye has two parts that focus images:
The cornea is the clear, dome-shaped front surface of your eye.
The lens is a clear structure about the size and shape of an M&M's candy.
In a normally shaped eye, each of these focusing elements has a perfectly smooth curvature, like the surface of a marble. A cornea and lens with such curvature bend (refract) all incoming light to make a sharply focused image directly on the retina, at the back of your eye.
If your cornea or lens isn't evenly and smoothly curved, light rays aren't refracted properly, and you have a refractive error.
Farsightedness occurs when your eyeball is shorter than normal or your cornea is curved too little. The effect is the opposite of nearsightedness.
In addition to farsightedness, other refractive errors include:
Nearsightedness (myopia). Nearsightedness usually occurs when your eyeball is longer than normal or your cornea is curved too steeply. Instead of being focused precisely on your retina, light is focused in front of your retina, resulting in a blurry appearance for distant objects.
Astigmatism. This occurs when your cornea or lens is curved more steeply in one direction than it is in another. Uncorrected astigmatism blurs your vision.
Farsightedness can be associated with several problems, such as:
Crossed eyes. Some children with farsightedness may develop crossed eyes. Specially designed eyeglasses that correct for part or all of the farsightedness may treat this problem.
Reduced quality of life. With uncorrected farsightedness, you might not be able to perform a task as well as you wish. And your limited vision may detract from your enjoyment of day-to-day activities.
Eyestrain. Uncorrected farsightedness may cause you to squint or strain your eyes to maintain focus. This can lead to eyestrain and headaches.
Impaired safety. Your own safety and that of others may be jeopardized if you have an uncorrected vision problem. This could be especially serious if you are driving a car or operating heavy equipment.
Financial burden. The cost of corrective lenses, eye exams and medical treatments can add up, especially with a chronic condition such as farsightedness.
Usually, a child having a febrile seizure shakes all over and loses consciousness. Sometimes, the child may get very stiff or twitch in just one area of the body.
A child having a febrile seizure may: Have a fever higher than 100.4 F (38.0 C), Lose consciousness, Shake or jerk arms and legs.
Febrile seizures are classified as simple or complex:
Simple febrile seizures. This most common type lasts from a few seconds to 15 minutes. Simple febrile seizures do not recur within a 24-hour period and are not specific to one part of the body.
Complex febrile seizures. This type lasts longer than 15 minutes, occurs more than once within 24 hours or is confined to one side of your child's body.
Febrile seizures most often occur within 24 hours of the onset of a fever and can be the first sign that a child is ill.
See your child's doctor as soon as possible after your child's first febrile seizure, even if it lasts only a few seconds. Call an ambulance to take your child to the emergency room if the seizure lasts longer than five minutes or is accompanied by: Vomiting, A stiff neck, Breathing problems, Extreme sleepiness.
Usually, a higher than normal body temperature causes febrile seizures. Even a low-grade fever can trigger a febrile seizure.
The fevers that trigger febrile seizures are usually caused by a viral infection, and less commonly by a bacterial infection. Influenza and the virus that causes roseola, which often are accompanied by high fevers, appear to be most frequently associated with febrile seizures.
The risk of febrile seizures may increase after some childhood immunizations. These include the diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis or measles-mumps-rubella vaccinations. A child can develop a low-grade fever after a vaccination. The fever, not the vaccination, causes the seizure.
Factors that increase the risk of having a febrile seizure include:
Young age. Most febrile seizures occur in children between 6 months and 5 years of age, with the greatest risk between 12 and 18 months of age.
Family history. Some children inherit a family's tendency to have seizures with a fever. Additionally, researchers have linked several genes to a susceptibility to febrile seizures.
Most febrile seizures produce no lasting effects. Simple febrile seizures don't cause brain damage, intellectual disability or learning disabilities, and they don't mean your child has a more serious underlying disorder.
Febrile seizures are provoked seizures and don't indicate epilepsy. Epilepsy is a condition characterized by recurrent unprovoked seizures caused by abnormal electrical signals in the brain.
The most common complication is the possibility of more febrile seizures. The risk of recurrence is higher if:
Your child's first seizure resulted from a low fever.
The period between the start of the fever and the seizure was short.
An immediate family member has a history of febrile seizures.
Your child was younger than 18 months at the time of the first febrile seizure.
Fecal incontinence may occur temporarily during an occasional bout of diarrhea, but for some people, fecal incontinence is chronic or recurring. People with this condition may be unable to stop the urge to defecate, which comes on so suddenly that they don't make it to the toilet in time. This is called urge incontinence.
Another type of fecal incontinence occurs in people who are not aware of the need to pass stool. This is called passive incontinence.
Fecal incontinence may be accompanied by other bowel problems, such as: Diarrhea, Constipation, Gas and bloating.
See your doctor if you or your child develops fecal incontinence, especially if it's frequent or severe, or if it causes emotional distress. Often, people are reluctant to tell their doctors about fecal incontinence. But treatments are available, and the sooner you're evaluated, the sooner you may find some relief from your symptoms.
For many people, there is more than one cause of fecal incontinence.
Causes can include:
Muscle damage. Injury to the rings of muscle at the end of the rectum (anal sphincter) may make it difficult to hold stool back properly. This kind of damage can occur during childbirth, especially if you have an episiotomy or forceps are used during delivery.
Nerve damage. Injury to the nerves that sense stool in the rectum or those that control the anal sphincter can lead to fecal incontinence. The nerve damage can be caused by childbirth, constant straining during bowel movements, spinal cord injury or stroke. Some diseases, such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis, also can affect these nerves and cause damage that leads to fecal incontinence.
Constipation. Chronic constipation may cause a dry, hard mass of stool (impacted stool) to form in the rectum and become too large to pass. The muscles of the rectum and intestines stretch and eventually weaken, allowing watery stool from farther up the digestive tract to move around the impacted stool and leak out. Chronic constipation may also cause nerve damage that leads to fecal incontinence.
Diarrhea. Solid stool is easier to retain in the rectum than is loose stool, so the loose stools of diarrhea can cause or worsen fecal incontinence.
Hemorrhoids. When the veins in your rectum swell, causing hemorrhoids, this keeps your anus from closing completely, which can allow stool to leak out.
Loss of storage capacity in the rectum. Normally, the rectum stretches to accommodate stool. If your rectum is scarred or your rectal walls have stiffened from surgery, radiation treatment or inflammatory bowel disease, the rectum can't stretch as much as it needs to, and excess stool can leak out.
Surgery. Surgery to treat enlarged veins in the rectum or anus (hemorrhoids), as well as more-complex operations involving the rectum and anus, can cause muscle and nerve damage that leads to fecal incontinence.
Rectal prolapse. Fecal incontinence can be a result of this condition, in which the rectum drops down into the anus.
Rectocele. In women, fecal incontinence can occur if the rectum protrudes through the vagina.
A number of factors may increase your risk of developing fecal incontinence, including:
Age. Although fecal incontinence can occur at any age, it's more common in adults over 65.
Being female. Fecal incontinence can be a complication of childbirth. Recent research has also found that women who take menopausal hormone replacement therapy are more likely to have fecal incontinence.
Nerve damage. People who have long-standing diabetes or multiple sclerosis — conditions that can damage nerves that help control defecation — may be at risk of fecal incontinence.
Dementia. Fecal incontinence is often present in late-stage Alzheimer's disease and dementia.
Physical disability. Being physically disabled may make it difficult to reach a toilet in time. An injury that caused a physical disability also may cause rectal nerve damage, leading to fecal incontinence.
Complications of fecal incontinence may include:
Emotional distress. The loss of dignity associated with losing control over one's bodily functions can lead to embarrassment, shame, frustration and depression. It's common for people with fecal incontinence to try to hide the problem or to avoid social engagements.
Skin irritation. The skin around the anus is delicate and sensitive. Repeated contact with stool can lead to pain and itching, and potentially to sores (ulcers) that require medical treatment.
The main symptom of infertility is the inability to get pregnant. A menstrual cycle that's too long (35 days or more), too short (less than 21 days), irregular or absent can mean that you're not ovulating. There may be no other outward signs or symptoms.
When to seek help sometimes depends on your age:
Up to age 35, most doctors recommend trying to get pregnant for at least a year before testing or treatment.
If you're between 35 and 40, discuss your concerns with your doctor after six months of trying.
If you're older than 40, your doctor may want to begin testing or treatment right away.
Your doctor may also want to begin testing or treatment right away if you or your partner has known fertility problems, or if you have a history of irregular or painful periods, pelvic inflammatory disease, repeated miscarriages, prior cancer treatment, or endometriosis.
Each of these factors is essential to become pregnant:
You need to ovulate. To get pregnant, your ovaries must produce and release an egg, a process known as ovulation. Your doctor can help evaluate your menstrual cycles and confirm ovulation.
Your partner needs sperm. For most couples, this isn't a problem unless your partner has a history of illness or surgery. Your doctor can run some simple tests to evaluate the health of your partner's sperm.
You need to have regular intercourse. You need to have regular sexual intercourse during your fertile time. Your doctor can help you better understand when you're most fertile.
You need to have open fallopian tubes and a normal uterus. The egg and sperm meet in the fallopian tubes, and the embryo needs a healthy uterus in which to grow.
For pregnancy to occur, every step of the human reproduction process has to happen correctly. The steps in this process are:
One of the two ovaries releases a mature egg.
The egg is picked up by the fallopian tube.
Sperm swim up the cervix, through the uterus and into the fallopian tube to reach the egg for fertilization.
The fertilized egg travels down the fallopian tube to the uterus.
The fertilized egg implants and grows in the uterus.
In women, a number of factors can disrupt this process at any step. Female infertility is caused by one or more of the factors below.
Ovulation disorders, meaning you ovulate infrequently or not at all, account for infertility in about 1 in 4 infertile couples. Problems with the regulation of reproductive hormones by the hypothalamus or the pituitary gland, or problems in the ovary, can cause ovulation disorders.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). PCOS causes a hormone imbalance, which affects ovulation. PCOS is associated with insulin resistance and obesity, abnormal hair growth on the face or body, and acne. It's the most common cause of female infertility.
Hypothalamic dysfunction. Two hormones produced by the pituitary gland are responsible for stimulating ovulation each month — follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). Excess physical or emotional stress, a very high or very low body weight, or a recent substantial weight gain or loss can disrupt production of these hormones and affect ovulation. Irregular or absent periods are the most common signs.
Premature ovarian failure. Also called primary ovarian insufficiency, this disorder is usually caused by an autoimmune response or by premature loss of eggs from your ovary (possibly from genetics or chemotherapy). The ovary no longer produces eggs, and it lowers estrogen production in women under the age of 40.
Too much prolactin. The pituitary gland may cause excess production of prolactin (hyperprolactinemia), which reduces estrogen production and may cause infertility. Usually related to a pituitary gland problem, this can also be caused by medications you're taking for another disease.
Damaged or blocked fallopian tubes keep sperm from getting to the egg or block the passage of the fertilized egg into the uterus. Causes of fallopian tube damage or blockage can include: Pelvic inflammatory disease, an infection of the uterus and fallopian tubes due to chlamydia, gonorrhea or other sexually transmitted infections, Previous surgery in the abdomen or pelvis, including surgery for ectopic pregnancy, in which a fertilized egg implants and develops in a fallopian tube instead of the uterus, Pelvic tuberculosis, a major cause of tubal infertility worldwide, although uncommon in the United States.
Endometriosis occurs when tissue that normally grows in the uterus implants and grows in other locations. This extra tissue growth — and the surgical removal of it — can cause scarring, which may block fallopian tubes and keep an egg and sperm from uniting.
Endometriosis can also affect the lining of the uterus, disrupting implantation of the fertilized egg. The condition also seems to affect fertility in less-direct ways, such as damage to the sperm or egg.
Several uterine or cervical causes can impact fertility by interfering with implantation or increasing the likelihood of a miscarriage:
Benign polyps or tumors (fibroids or myomas) are common in the uterus. Some can block fallopian tubes or interfere with implantation, affecting fertility. However, many women who have fibroids or polyps do become pregnant.
Endometriosis scarring or inflammation within the uterus can disrupt implantation.
Uterine abnormalities present from birth, such as an abnormally shaped uterus, can cause problems becoming or remaining pregnant.
Cervical stenosis, a narrowing of the cervix, can be caused by an inherited malformation or damage to the cervix.
Sometimes the cervix can't produce the best type of mucus to allow the sperm to travel through the cervix into the uterus.
Sometimes, the cause of infertility is never found. A combination of several minor factors in both partners could cause unexplained fertility problems. Although it's frustrating to get no specific answer, this problem may correct itself with time. But, you shouldn't delay treatment for infertility.
Certain factors may put you at higher risk of infertility, including:
Age. The quality and quantity of a woman's eggs begin to decline with increasing age. In the mid-30s, the rate of follicle loss speeds, resulting in fewer and poorer quality eggs. This makes conception more difficult, and increases the risk of miscarriage.
Smoking. Besides damaging your cervix and fallopian tubes, smoking increases your risk of miscarriage and ectopic pregnancy. It's also thought to age your ovaries and deplete your eggs prematurely. Stop smoking before beginning fertility treatment.
Weight. Being overweight or significantly underweight may affect normal ovulation. Getting to a healthy body mass index (BMI) may increase the frequency of ovulation and likelihood of pregnancy.
Sexual history. Sexually transmitted infections such as chlamydia and gonorrhea can damage the fallopian tubes. Having unprotected intercourse with multiple partners increases your risk of a sexually transmitted infection that may cause fertility problems later.
Alcohol. Stick to moderate alcohol consumption of no more than one alcoholic drink per day.
Symptoms vary depending on what type of sexual dysfunction you're experiencing:
Low sexual desire. This most common of female sexual dysfunctions involves a lack of sexual interest and willingness to be sexual.
Sexual arousal disorder. Your desire for sex might be intact, but you have difficulty with arousal or are unable to become aroused or maintain arousal during sexual activity.
Orgasmic disorder. You have persistent or recurrent difficulty in achieving orgasm after sufficient sexual arousal and ongoing stimulation.
Sexual pain disorder. You have pain associated with sexual stimulation or vaginal contact.
If sexual problems affect your relationship or worry you, make an appointment with your doctor for evaluation.
Sexual problems often develop when your hormones are in flux, such as after having a baby or during menopause. Major illness, such as cancer, diabetes, or heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease, can also contribute to sexual dysfunction.
Factors — often interrelated — that contribute to sexual dissatisfaction or dysfunction include:
Physical. Any number of medical conditions, including cancer, kidney failure, multiple sclerosis, heart disease and bladder problems, can lead to sexual dysfunction. Certain medications, including some antidepressants, blood pressure medications, antihistamines and chemotherapy drugs, can decrease your sexual desire and your body's ability to experience orgasm.
Hormonal. Lower estrogen levels after menopause may lead to changes in your genital tissues and sexual responsiveness. A decrease in estrogen leads to decreased blood flow to the pelvic region, which can result in less genital sensation, as well as needing more time to build arousal and reach orgasm.
The vaginal lining also becomes thinner and less elastic, particularly if you're not sexually active. These factors can lead to painful intercourse (dyspareunia). Sexual desire also decreases when hormonal levels decrease.
Your body's hormone levels also shift after giving birth and during breast-feeding, which can lead to vaginal dryness and can affect your desire to have sex.
Psychological and social. Untreated anxiety or depression can cause or contribute to sexual dysfunction, as can long-term stress and a history of sexual abuse. The worries of pregnancy and demands of being a new mother may have similar effects.
Long-standing conflicts with your partner — about sex or other aspects of your relationship — can diminish your sexual responsiveness as well. Cultural and religious issues and problems with body image also can contribute.
Some factors may increase your risk of sexual dysfunction: Depression or anxiety, Heart and blood vessel disease, Neurological conditions, such as spinal cord injury or multiple sclerosis, Gynecological conditions, such as vulvovaginal atrophy, infections or lichen sclerosus, Certain medications, such as antidepressants or high blood pressure medications, Emotional or psychological stress, especially with regard to your relationship with your partner, A history of sexual abuse.
Fetal macrosomia can be difficult to detect and diagnose during pregnancy. Signs and symptoms include:
Large fundal height. During prenatal visits, your health care provider might measure your fundal height — the distance from the top of your uterus to your pubic bone. A larger than expected fundal height could be a sign of fetal macrosomia.
Excessive amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios). Having too much amniotic fluid — the fluid that surrounds and protects a baby during pregnancy — might be a sign that your baby is larger than average.
    
The amount of amniotic fluid reflects your baby's urine output, and a larger baby produces more urine. Some conditions that cause a baby to be larger might also increase his or her urine output.
Genetic factors and maternal conditions such as obesity or diabetes can cause fetal macrosomia. Rarely, a baby might have a medical condition that makes him or her grow faster and larger.
Sometimes it's unknown what causes a baby to be larger than average.
Many factors might increase the risk of fetal macrosomia — some you can control, but others you can't.
For example:
Maternal diabetes. Fetal macrosomia is more likely if you had diabetes before pregnancy (pre-gestational diabetes) or if you develop diabetes during pregnancy (gestational diabetes).
If your diabetes isn't well controlled, your baby is likely to have larger shoulders and greater amounts of body fat than would a baby whose mother doesn't have diabetes.
A history of fetal macrosomia. If you've previously given birth to a large baby, you're at increased risk of having another large baby. Also, if you weighed more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces at birth, you're more likely to have a large baby.
Maternal obesity. Fetal macrosomia is more likely if you're obese.
Excessive weight gain during pregnancy. Gaining too much weight during pregnancy increases the risk of fetal macrosomia.
Previous pregnancies. The risk of fetal macrosomia increases with each pregnancy. Up to the fifth pregnancy, the average birth weight for each successive pregnancy typically increases by up to about 4 ounces (113 grams).
Having a boy. Male infants typically weigh slightly more than female infants. Most babies who weigh more than 9 pounds, 15 ounces (4,500 grams) are male.
Overdue pregnancy. If your pregnancy continues by more than two weeks past your due date, your baby is at increased risk of fetal macrosomia.
Maternal age. Women older than 35 are more likely to have a baby diagnosed with fetal macrosomia.
Fetal macrosomia is more likely to be a result of maternal diabetes, obesity or weight gain during pregnancy than other causes. If these risk factors aren't present and fetal macrosomia is suspected, it's possible that your baby might have a rare medical condition that affects fetal growth.
If a rare medical condition is suspected, your health care provider might recommend prenatal diagnostic tests and perhaps a visit with a genetic counselor, depending on the test results.
Fetal macrosomia poses health risks for you and your baby — both during pregnancy and after childbirth.
Possible maternal complications of fetal macrosomia might include:
Labor problems. Fetal macrosomia can cause a baby to become wedged in the birth canal (shoulder dystocia), sustain birth injuries, or require the use of forceps or a vacuum device during delivery (operative vaginal delivery). Sometimes a C-section is needed.
Genital tract lacerations. During childbirth, fetal macrosomia can cause a baby to injure the birth canal — such as by tearing vaginal tissues and the muscles between the vagina and the anus (perineal muscles).
Bleeding after delivery. Fetal macrosomia increases the risk that your uterine muscles won't properly contract after you give birth (uterine atony). This can lead to potentially serious bleeding after delivery.
Uterine rupture. If you've had a prior C-section or major uterine surgery, fetal macrosomia increases the risk of uterine rupture during labor — a rare but serious complication in which the uterus tears open along the scar line from the C-section or other uterine surgery. An emergency C-section is needed to prevent life-threatening complications.
Possible complications of fetal macrosomia for your baby might include:
Lower than normal blood sugar level. A baby diagnosed with fetal macrosomia is more likely to be born with a blood sugar level that's lower than normal.
Childhood obesity. Research suggests that the risk of childhood obesity increases as birth weight increases.
Metabolic syndrome. If your baby is diagnosed with fetal macrosomia, he or she is at risk of developing metabolic syndrome during childhood.
Metabolic syndrome is a cluster of conditions — increased blood pressure, a high blood sugar level, excess body fat around the waist and abnormal cholesterol levels — that occur together, increasing the risk of heart disease, stroke and diabetes.
Further research is needed to determine whether these effects might increase the risk of adult diabetes, obesity and heart disease.
You have a fever when your temperature rises above its normal range. What's normal for you may be a little higher or lower than the average normal temperature of 98.6 F (37 C).
Depending on what's causing your fever, additional fever signs and symptoms may include: Sweating, Chills and shivering, Headache, Muscle aches, Loss of appetite, Irritability, Dehydration, General weakness.
Children between the ages of 6 months and 5 years might experience febrile seizures. About a third of the children who have one febrile seizure will have another one, most commonly within the next 12 months.
To take a temperature, you can choose from several types of thermometers, including oral, rectal, ear (tympanic) and forehead (temporal artery) thermometers.
Oral and rectal thermometers generally provide the most accurate measurement of core body temperature. Ear or forehead thermometers, although convenient, provide less accurate temperature measurements.
In infants, doctors generally recommend taking a temperature with a rectal thermometer.
When reporting a temperature to your or your child's doctor, give the reading and explain how the temperature was taken.
Fevers by themselves may not be a cause for alarm — or a reason to call a doctor. Yet there are some circumstances when you should seek medical advice for your baby, your child or yourself.
An unexplained fever is greater cause for concern in infants and in children than in adults. Call your baby's doctor if your child is:
Younger than age 3 months and has a rectal temperature of 100.4 F (38 C) or higher.
Between ages 3 and 6 months and has a rectal temperature up to 102 F (38.9 C) and seems unusually irritable, lethargic or uncomfortable or has a temperature higher than 102 F (38.9 C).
Between ages 6 and 24 months and has a rectal temperature higher than 102 F (38.9 C) that lasts longer than one day but shows no other symptoms. If your child also has other signs and symptoms, such as a cold, cough or diarrhea, you might call your child's doctor sooner based on severity.
There's probably no cause for alarm if your child has a fever but is responsive — making eye contact with you and responding to your facial expressions and to your voice — and is drinking fluids and playing.
Call your child's doctor if your child:
Is listless or irritable, vomits repeatedly, has a severe headache or stomachache, or has any other symptoms causing significant discomfort.
Has a fever after being left in a hot car. Seek medical care immediately.
Has a fever that lasts longer than three days.
Appears listless and has poor eye contact with you.
Ask your child's doctor for guidance in special circumstances, such as a child with immune system problems or with a pre-existing illness.
Call your doctor if your temperature is 103 F (39.4 C) or higher. Seek immediate medical attention if any of these signs or symptoms accompanies a fever: Severe headache, Unusual skin rash, especially if the rash rapidly worsens, Unusual sensitivity to bright light, Stiff neck and pain when you bend your head forward, Mental confusion, Persistent vomiting, Difficulty breathing or chest pain, Abdominal pain or pain when urinating, Convulsions or seizures.
Fever occurs when an area in your brain called the hypothalamus (hi-poe-THAL-uh-muhs) — also known as your body's "thermostat" — shifts the set point of your normal body temperature upward. When this happens, you may feel chilled and add layers of clothing or wrap up in a blanket, or you may shiver to generate more body heat, eventually resulting in an elevated body temperature.
Normal body temperature varies throughout the day — it's lower in the morning and higher in the late afternoon and evening. Although most people consider 98.6 F (37 C) normal, your body temperature can vary by a degree or more — from about 97 F (36.1 C) to 99 F (37.2 C) — and still be considered normal.
Fever or elevated body temperature might be caused by: A virus, A bacterial infection, Heat exhaustion, Certain inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis — inflammation of the lining of your joints (synovium), A malignant tumor, Some medications, such as antibiotics and drugs used to treat high blood pressure or seizures, Some immunizations, such as the diphtheria, tetanus and acellular pertussis (DTaP) or pneumococcal vaccine.
Sometimes the cause of a fever can't be identified. If you have a fever for more than three weeks and your doctor isn't able to find the cause after extensive evaluation, the diagnosis may be fever of unknown origin.
Children between the ages of 6 months and 5 years may experience fever-induced convulsions (febrile seizures), which usually involve loss of consciousness and shaking of limbs on both sides of the body. Although alarming for parents, the vast majority of febrile seizures cause no lasting effects.
If a seizure occurs: Lay your child on his or her side or stomach on the floor or ground, Remove any sharp objects that are near your child, Loosen tight clothing, Hold your child to prevent injury, Don't place anything in your child's mouth or try to stop the seizure.
Most seizures stop on their own. Take your child to the doctor as soon as possible after the seizure to determine the cause of the fever.
Call for emergency medical assistance if a seizure lasts longer than five minutes.
Fibroadenomas are solid breast lumps that usually are: Round with distinct, smooth borders, Easily moved, Firm or rubbery, Painless.
You can have one or many fibroadenomas in one or both breasts.
In healthy women, normal breast tissue often feels lumpy. Make an appointment with your doctor if: You detect a new breast lump, You notice other changes in your breasts, A breast lump you've had checked before has grown or otherwise changed and appears to be separate from the surrounding breast tissue.
The cause of fibroadenomas is unknown, but they might be related to reproductive hormones. Fibroadenomas occur more often during your reproductive years, can become bigger during pregnancy or with use of hormone therapy, and might shrink after menopause, when hormone levels decrease.
In addition to simple fibroadenomas, there are:
Complex fibroadenomas. These can contain changes, such as an overgrowth of cells (hyperplasia) that can grow rapidly. A pathologist makes the diagnosis of a complex fibroadenoma after reviewing the tissue from a biopsy.
Juvenile fibroadenomas. This is the most common type of breast lump found in girls and adolescents between the ages of 10 and 18. These fibroadenomas can grow large, but most shrink over time, and some disappear.
Giant fibroadenomas. These can grow to larger than 2 inches (5 centimeters). They might need to be removed because they can press on or replace other breast tissue.
Phyllodes tumor. Although usually benign, some phyllodes tumors can become cancerous (malignant). Doctors usually recommend that these be removed.
Most fibroadenomas don't affect your risk of breast cancer. However, your breast cancer risk might increase slightly if you have a complex fibroadenoma or a phyllodes tumor.
Signs and symptoms of fibrocystic breasts may include: Breast lumps or areas of thickening that tend to blend into the surrounding breast tissue, Generalized breast pain or tenderness, Breast lumps that fluctuate in size with the menstrual cycle, Green or dark brown nonbloody nipple discharge that tends to leak without pressure or squeezing, Breast changes that are similar in both breasts, Monthly increase in breast pain or lumpiness from midcycle (ovulation) to just before your period.
Fibrocystic breast changes occur most often in women in their 20s to 50s. Rarely do postmenopausal women experience fibrocystic breast changes, unless they're on hormone therapy.
Most fibrocystic breast changes are normal. However, make an appointment with your doctor if: You find a new breast lump or area of prominent thickening, You have specific areas of continuous or worsening breast pain, Breast changes persist after your period, Your doctor evaluated a breast lump but now it seems to be bigger or otherwise changed.
The exact cause of fibrocystic breast changes isn't known, but experts suspect that reproductive hormones — especially estrogen — play a role.
Fluctuating hormone levels during your menstrual cycle can cause breast discomfort and areas of lumpy breast tissue that feel tender, sore and swollen. Fibrocystic breast changes tend to be more bothersome before your menstrual period, and the pain and lumpiness tends to clear up or lessen once your menstrual period begins.
When examined under a microscope, fibrocystic breast tissue includes distinct components such as: Fluid-filled round or oval sacs (cysts), A prominence of scar-like fibrous tissue (fibrosis), Overgrowth of cells (hyperplasia) lining the milk ducts or milk-producing tissues (lobules) of the breast, Enlarged breast lobules (adenosis).
Having fibrocystic breasts doesn't increase your risk of breast cancer.
Signs or symptoms of the disease depend on what artery is affected by fibromuscular dysplasia. Sometimes, more than artery is narrowed. Many people who have fibromuscular dysplasia don't have any symptoms.
If the arteries leading to your kidneys (renal arteries) are affected, you may have: High blood pressure, Tissue damage in your kidneys (ischemic renal atrophy), Chronic kidney failure (rarely).
If the arteries leading to your brain (carotid arteries) are affected, you may have: Headache, Dizziness, Temporary loss of vision, Pulsating ringing in your ears (tinnitus), Neck pain, Facial weakness or numbness, Weakness or numbness in the limbs, Difficulty speaking.
If the arteries leading to your abdomen (mesenteric arteries) are affected, you may have: Abdominal pain after eating, Unintended weight loss.
Fibromuscular dysplasia often occurs with tears in the walls of your coronary arteries, also called arterial dissection or spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD). But the exact connection between these two conditions isn't yet clear. If the arteries leading to your heart (coronary arteries) are affected, you may have: Chest pain, Shortness of breath, Sweating, Nausea.
If the arteries leading to your arms or legs (peripheral arteries) are affected, you may have: Discomfort when moving your legs, feet, arms or hands, Cold limbs, Weakness, Numbness, Skin changes in color or appearance.
If you have fibromuscular dysplasia, seek medical attention immediately if you have any of these signs and symptoms: Sudden changes in your vision, Sudden changes in your ability to speak, Sudden or new weakness in your arms or legs.
If you have any of the other signs or symptoms listed and are concerned about your risk of fibromuscular dysplasia, see your doctor.
Fibromuscular dysplasia can be passed down through families (inherited). Talk to your doctor about your family health history so together you can be alert to changes that might suggest you have fibromuscular dysplasia. There's currently no genetic test for fibromuscular dysplasia.
The cause of fibromuscular dysplasia is unknown. However, several factors may play a role.
Genetics. If someone in your family has fibromuscular dysplasia, you might get the condition, too. It might occur in a different artery or you may have a milder or more severe case. Or, you may never get fibromuscular dysplasia at all. Not everyone who has fibromuscular dysplasia has a relative with the disease.
Hormones. Women have fibromuscular dysplasia more often than men do, so researchers think hormones may play a role in the development of the disease. But exactly how is unclear. Fibromuscular dysplasia is not linked to a woman's use of birth control pills, number of pregnancies, or age when they gave birth.
Abnormally formed arteries. A lack of oxygen to the arteries or the use of certain medications or tobacco can cause the arteries to develop abnormally, leading to reduced blood flow. Sometimes, the arteries may be positioned abnormally.
Several things can make you more likely to get fibromuscular dysplasia.
Sex. Women have a much greater risk of fibromuscular dysplasia than do men.
Age. Fibromuscular disorder tends to be diagnosed in people in their early 50s.
Smoking. If you smoke, quit. People who smoke appear to have an increased risk of developing fibromuscular dysplasia. For those already diagnosed with the disease, smoking increases the risk for more serious fibromuscular dysplasia.
Fibromuscular dysplasia can cause a number of complications. These include:
High blood pressure. A common complication of fibromuscular dysplasia is high blood pressure. The narrowing of the arteries causes higher pressure on your artery walls, which can lead to further artery damage, heart disease or heart failure.
Dissected artery. Fibromuscular dysplasia and tears in the walls of your arteries often occur together. This process, called arterial dissection or spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD), can limit blood flow to the organ supplied by the injured artery. This can affect any artery.
Aneurysms. Fibromuscular dysplasia can weaken the walls of your arteries, creating a bulge called an aneurysm. If an aneurysm ruptures, it can be a life-threatening emergency. An aneurysm can occur in any artery affected by fibromuscular dysplasia.
Stroke. If you have a dissected artery leading to your brain or if an aneurysm in an artery to your brain ruptures, you can have a stroke. High blood pressure can also increase your risk of a stroke.
The primary symptoms of fibromyalgia include:
Widespread pain. The pain associated with fibromyalgia often is described as a constant dull ache that has lasted for at least three months. To be considered widespread, the pain must occur on both sides of your body and above and below your waist.
Fatigue. People with fibromyalgia often awaken tired, even though they report sleeping for long periods of time. Sleep is often disrupted by pain, and many patients with fibromyalgia have other sleep disorders, such as restless legs syndrome and sleep apnea.
Cognitive difficulties. A symptom commonly referred to as "fibro fog" impairs the ability to focus, pay attention and concentrate on mental tasks.
Fibromyalgia often co-exists with other conditions, such as: Irritable bowel syndrome, Chronic fatigue syndrome, Migraine and other types of headaches, Interstitial cystitis or painful bladder syndrome, Temporomandibular joint disorders, Anxiety, Depression, Postural tachycardia syndrome.
Many researchers believe that repeated nerve stimulation causes the brain and spinal cord of people with fibromyalgia to change. This change involves an abnormal increase in levels of certain chemicals in the brain that signal pain.
In addition, the brain's pain receptors seem to develop a sort of memory of the pain and become sensitized, meaning they can overreact to painful and nonpainful signals.
There are likely many factors that lead to these changes, including:
Genetics. Because fibromyalgia tends to run in families, there may be certain genetic mutations that may make you more susceptible to developing the disorder.
Infections. Some illnesses appear to trigger or aggravate fibromyalgia.
Physical or emotional events. Fibromyalgia can sometimes be triggered by a physical event, such as a car accident. Prolonged psychological stress may also trigger the condition.
Risk factors for fibromyalgia include:
Your sex. Fibromyalgia is diagnosed more often in women than in men.
Family history. You may be more likely to develop fibromyalgia if a parent or sibling also has the condition.
Other disorders. If you have osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis or lupus, you may be more likely to develop fibromyalgia.
The pain, fatigue, and poor sleep quality associated with fibromyalgia can interfere with your ability to function at home or on the job. The frustration of dealing with an often-misunderstood condition also can result in depression and health-related anxiety.
Fibrous dysplasia may cause few or no signs and symptoms, particularly if the condition is mild. More severe fibrous dysplasia may cause: Bone pain, usually a mild to moderate dull ache, Swelling, Bone deformity, Bone fractures, particularly in the arms or legs, Curvature of leg bones.
Fibrous dysplasia can affect any bone in the body, but the most commonly affected bones include the following: Thighbone (femur), Shinbone (tibia), Upper arm bone (humerus), Skull, Ribs, Pelvis.
Rarely, fibrous dysplasia may be associated with a syndrome that affects the hormone-producing glands of your endocrine system. These abnormalities may include: Very early puberty, Overactive hormone production, Light brown spots on the skin.
Increased bone pain also may be associated with the normal hormonal changes of the menstrual cycle or pregnancy.
See your doctor if you or your child develops any of the following: Bone pain that increases with weight-bearing activity or doesn't go away with rest, Bone pain that interrupts sleep, Difficulty walking or limping, Unexplained swelling, Changes in bone shape, Difference in limb length.
Fibrous dysplasia is linked to a gene mutation present in certain cells that produce bone. The mutation results in the production of immature and irregular bone tissue. Most often the irregular bone tissue (lesion) is present at a single site on one bone. Less often multiple bones are affected, and there may be more than one lesion on multiple bones.
A lesion usually stops growing sometime during puberty. However, lesions may grow again during pregnancy.
The gene mutation associated with fibrous dysplasia occurs after conception, in the early stages of fetal development. Therefore, the mutation isn't inherited from your parents, and you can't pass it on to your children.
Severe fibrous dysplasia can cause:
Bone deformity or fracture. The weakened area of an affected bone can cause the bone to bend. These weakened bones also are more likely to fracture.
Vision and hearing loss. The nerves to your eyes and ears may be surrounded by affected bone. Severe deformity of facial bones can lead to loss of vision and hearing, but it's a rare complication.
Arthritis. If leg and pelvic bones are deformed, arthritis may form in the joints of those bones.
Cancer. Rarely, an affected area of bone can become cancerous. This rare complication usually only affects people who have had prior radiation therapy.
Most people have no signs or symptoms associated with flatfeet. But some people with flatfeet experience foot pain, particularly in the heel or arch area. Pain may worsen with activity. Swelling along the inside of the ankle can also occur.
Talk to your doctor if you or your child has foot pain.
A flat foot is normal in infants and toddlers, because the foot's arch hasn't yet developed. Most people's arches develop throughout childhood, but some people never develop arches. This is a normal variation in foot type, and people without arches may or may not have problems.
Some children have flexible flatfoot, in which the arch is visible when the child is sitting or standing on tiptoes, but disappears when the child stands. Most children outgrow flexible flatfoot without problems.
Arches can also fall over time. Years of wear and tear can weaken the tendon that runs along the inside of your ankle and helps support your arch.
Factors that can increase your risk of flatfeet include: Obesity, Injury to your foot or ankle, Rheumatoid arthritis, Aging, Diabetes.
Signs and symptoms of floor of the mouth cancer can include: Mouth pain, Sores in your mouth that won't heal, Loose teeth, Pain when you swallow, Weight loss, Ear pain, Swelling in your neck that may hurt, White patches in your mouth that won't go away.
Talk to your doctor or dentist about any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
Floor of the mouth cancer forms when a genetic mutation turns normal, healthy cells into abnormal cells. Healthy cells grow and multiply at a set rate, eventually dying at a set time. Abnormal cells grow and multiply out of control, and they don't die. The accumulating abnormal cells form a mass (tumor). Cancer cells invade nearby tissues and can separate from an initial tumor to spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.
Things that may increase the rison of floor of the mouth cancer include: Using tobacco, Drinking alcohol, Being infected with human papillomavirus (HPV), Taking medications that suppress your immune system.
If you use tobacco and drink alcohol, the risk is even higher.
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, or FSGS, can be caused by a variety of conditions, like diabetes, sickle cell disease, other kidney diseases, and obesity. It can also be caused by an infection and drug toxicity. A rare form of FSGS is caused by inherited abnormal genes. Sometimes there's no identifiable cause.
Folliculitis signs and symptoms include: Clusters of small red bumps or white-headed pimples that develop around hair follicles, Pus-filled blisters that break open and crust over, Itchy, burning skin, Painful, tender skin, A large swollen bump or mass.
Make an appointment with your doctor if your condition is widespread or the signs and symptoms don't go away after a few days. You may need an antibiotic or an antifungal medication to help control the condition.
The two main types of folliculitis are superficial and deep. The superficial type involves part of the follicle, and the deep type involves the entire follicle and is usually more severe.
Forms of superficial folliculitis include:
Bacterial folliculitis. This common type is marked by itchy, white, pus-filled bumps. It occurs when hair follicles become infected with bacteria, usually Staphylococcus aureus (staph). Staph bacteria live on the skin all the time. But they generally cause problems only when they enter your body through a cut or other wound.
Hot tub folliculitis (pseudomonas folliculitis). With this type you may develop a rash of red, round, itchy bumps one to two days after exposure to the bacteria that causes it. Hot tub folliculitis is caused by pseudomonas bacteria, which is found in many places, including hot tubs and heated pools in which the chlorine and pH levels aren't well-regulated.
Razor bumps (pseudofolliculitis barbae). This is a skin irritation caused by ingrown hairs. It mainly affects men with curly hair who shave too close and is most noticeable on the face and neck. People who get bikini waxes may develop barber's itch in the groin area. This condition may leave dark raised scars (keloids).
Pityrosporum (pit-ih-ROS-puh-rum) folliculitis. This type produces chronic, red, itchy pustules on the back and chest and sometimes on the neck, shoulders, upper arms and face. This type is caused by a yeast infection.
Forms of deep folliculitis include:
Sycosis barbae. This type affects males who have begun to shave.
Gram-negative folliculitis. This type sometimes develops if you're receiving long-term antibiotic therapy for acne.
Boils (furuncles) and carbuncles. These occur when hair follicles become deeply infected with staph bacteria. A boil usually appears suddenly as a painful pink or red bump. A carbuncle is a cluster of boils.
Eosinophilic (e-o-sin-o-FILL-ik) folliculitis. This type mainly affects people with HIV/AIDS. Signs and symptoms include intense itching and recurring patches of bumps and pimples that form near hair follicles of the face and upper body. Once healed, the affected skin may be darker than your skin was previously (hyperpigmented). The cause of eosinophilic folliculitis isn't known.
Folliculitis is most often caused by an infection of hair follicles with Staphylococcus aureus (staph) bacteria. Folliculitis may also be caused by viruses, fungi and even an inflammation from ingrown hairs.
Follicles are densest on your scalp, and they occur everywhere on your body except your palms, soles, lips and mucous membranes.
Anyone can develop folliculitis. But certain factors make you more susceptible to the condition, including: Having a medical condition that reduces your resistance to infection, such as diabetes, chronic leukemia and HIV/AIDS, Having acne or dermatitis, Taking some medications, such as steroid creams or long-term antibiotic therapy for acne, Being a male with curly hair who shaves, Regularly wearing clothing that traps heat and sweat, such as rubber gloves or high boots, Soaking in a hot tub that's not maintained well, Causing damage to hair follicles by shaving, waxing or wearing tight clothing.
Possible complications of folliculitis include: Recurrent or spreading infection, Boils under the skin (furunculosis), Permanent skin damage, such as scarring or dark spots, Destruction of hair follicles and permanent hair loss.
For some people, an allergic reaction to a particular food may be uncomfortable but not severe. For other people, an allergic food reaction can be frightening and even life-threatening. Food allergy symptoms usually develop within a few minutes to two hours after eating the offending food.
The most common food allergy signs and symptoms include: Tingling or itching in the mouth, Hives, itching or eczema, Swelling of the lips, face, tongue and throat or other parts of the body, Wheezing, nasal congestion or trouble breathing, Abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, Dizziness, lightheadedness or fainting.
In some people, a food allergy can trigger a severe allergic reaction called anaphylaxis. This can cause life-threatening signs and symptoms, including: Constriction and tightening of the airways, A swollen throat or the sensation of a lump in your throat that makes it difficult to breathe, Shock with a severe drop in blood pressure, Rapid pulse, Dizziness, lightheadedness or loss of consciousness.
Emergency treatment is critical for anaphylaxis. Untreated, anaphylaxis can cause a coma or even death.
See a doctor or allergist if you have food allergy symptoms shortly after eating. If possible, see your doctor when the allergic reaction is occurring. This will help your doctor make a diagnosis.
Seek emergency treatment if you develop any signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis, such as: Constriction of airways that makes it difficult to breathe, Shock with a severe drop in blood pressure, Rapid pulse, Dizziness or lightheadedness.
When you have a food allergy, your immune system mistakenly identifies a specific food or a substance in food as something harmful. In respose, your immune system triggers cells to release an antibody known as immunoglobulin E (IgE) to neutralize the allergy-causing food or food substance (the allergen).
The next time you eat even the smallest amount of that food, IgE antibodies sense it and signal your immune system to release a chemical called histamine, as well as other chemicals, into your bloodstream. These chemicals cause allergy symptoms. Shellfish, such as shrimp, lobster and crab, Peanuts, Tree nuts, such as walnuts and pecans, Fish.
Peanuts, Tree nuts, Eggs, Cow's milk, Wheat, Soy.
Also known as oral allergy syndrome, pollen-food allergy syndrome affects many people who have hay fever. In this condition, certain fresh fruits and vegetables or nuts and spices can trigger an allergic reaction that causes the mouth to tingle or itch. In serious cases, the reaction results in swelling of the throat or even anaphylaxis.
Proteins in certain fruits, vegetables, nuts and spices cause the reaction because they're similar to allergy-causing proteins found in certain pollens. This is an example of cross-reactivity.
When you cook foods that trigger pollen-food allergy syndrome, your symptoms may be less severe.
This following table shows the specific fruits, vegetables, nuts and spices that can cause pollen-food allergy syndrome in people who are allergic to different pollens.
Eating certain foods may cause some people to feel itchy and lightheaded soon after starting to exercise. Serious cases may even involve hives or anaphylaxis. Not eating for a couple of hours before exercising and avoiding certain foods may help prevent this problem.
A food intolerance or a reaction to another substance you ate may cause the same signs and symptoms as a food allergy does — such as nausea, vomiting, cramping and diarrhea.
Depending on the type of food intolerance you have, you may be able to eat small amounts of problem foods without a reaction. By contrast, if you have a true food allergy, even a tiny amount of food may trigger an allergic reaction.
One of the tricky aspects of diagnosing food intolerance is that some people are sensitive not to the food itself but to a substance or ingredient used in the preparation of the food.
Common conditions that can cause symptoms mistaken for a food allergy include:
Absence of an enzyme needed to fully digest a food. You may not have adequate amounts of some enzymes needed to digest certain foods. Insufficient quantities of the enzyme lactase, for example, reduce your ability to digest lactose, the main sugar in milk products. Lactose intolerance can cause bloating, cramping, diarrhea and excess gas.
Food poisoning. Sometimes food poisoning can mimic an allergic reaction. Bacteria in spoiled tuna and other fish also can make a toxin that triggers harmful reactions.
Sensitivity to food additives. Some people have digestive reactions and other symptoms after eating certain food additives. For example, sulfites used to preserve dried fruit, canned goods and wine can trigger asthma attacks in sensitive people.
Histamine toxicity. Certain fish, such as tuna or mackerel, that are not refrigerated properly and that contain high amounts of bacteria may also contain high levels of histamine that trigger symptoms similar to those of food allergy. Rather than an allergic reaction, this is known as histamine toxicity or scombroid poisoning.
Celiac disease. While celiac disease is sometimes referred to as a gluten allergy, it does not result in anaphylaxis. Like a food allergy, it does involve an immune system response, but it's a unique reaction that's more complex than a simple food allergy.
This chronic digestive condition is triggered by eating gluten, a protein found in bread, pasta, cookies, and many other foods containing wheat, barley or rye.
If you have celiac disease and eat foods containing gluten, an immune reaction occurs that causes damage to the surface of your small intestine, leading to an inability to absorb certain nutrients.
Food allergy risk factors include:
Family history. You're at increased risk of food allergies if asthma, eczema, hives or allergies such as hay fever are common in your family.
Other allergies. If you're already allergic to one food, you may be at increased risk of becoming allergic to another. Similarly, if you have other types of allergic reactions, such as hay fever or eczema, your risk of having a food allergy is greater.
Age. Food allergies are more common in children, especially toddlers and infants. As you grow older, your digestive system matures and your body is less likely to absorb food or food components that trigger allergies.
Fortunately, children typically outgrow allergies to milk, soy, wheat and eggs. Severe allergies and allergies to nuts and shellfish are more likely to be lifelong.
Asthma. Asthma and food allergy commonly occur together. When they do, both food allergy and asthma symptoms are more likely to be severe.
Factors that may increase your risk of developing an anaphylactic reaction include: Having a history of asthma, Being a teenager or younger, Delaying use of epinephrine to treat your food allergy symptoms, Not having hives or other skin symptoms.
Complications of food allergy can include:
Anaphylaxis. This is a life-threatening allergic reaction.
Atopic dermatitis (eczema). Food allergy may cause a skin reaction, such as eczema.
Food poisoning symptoms vary with the source of contamination. Most types of food poisoning cause one or more of the following signs and symptoms: Nausea, Vomiting, Watery or bloody diarrhea, Abdominal pain and cramps, Fever.
Signs and symptoms may start within hours after eating the contaminated food, or they may begin days or even weeks later. Sickness caused by food poisoning generally lasts from a few hours to several days.
If you experience any of the following signs or symptoms, seek medical attention. Frequent episodes of vomiting and inability to keep liquids down, Bloody vomit or stools, Diarrhea for more than three days, Extreme pain or severe abdominal cramping, An oral temperature higher than 100.4 F (38 C), Signs or symptoms of dehydration — excessive thirst, dry mouth, little or no urination, severe weakness, dizziness, or lightheadedness, Neurological symptoms such as blurry vision, muscle weakness and tingling in the arms.
Contamination of food can happen at any point of production: growing, harvesting, processing, storing, shipping or preparing. Cross-contamination — the transfer of harmful organisms from one surface to another — is often the cause. This is especially troublesome for raw, ready-to-eat foods, such as salads or other produce. Because these foods aren't cooked, harmful organisms aren't destroyed before eating and can cause food poisoning.
Many bacterial, viral or parasitic agents cause food poisoning. The following table shows some of the possible contaminants, when you might start to feel symptoms and common ways the organism is spread.
Whether you become ill after eating contaminated food depends on the organism, the amount of exposure, your age and your health. High-risk groups include:
Older adults. As you get older, your immune system may not respond as quickly and as effectively to infectious organisms as when you were younger.
Pregnant women. During pregnancy, changes in metabolism and circulation may increase the risk of food poisoning. Your reaction may be more severe during pregnancy. Rarely, your baby may get sick, too.
Infants and young children. Their immune systems haven't fully developed.
People with chronic disease. Having a chronic condition — such as diabetes, liver disease or AIDS — or receiving chemotherapy or radiation therapy for cancer reduces your immune response.
The most common serious complication of food poisoning is dehydration — a severe loss of water and essential salts and minerals. If you're a healthy adult and drink enough to replace fluids you lose from vomiting and diarrhea, dehydration shouldn't be a problem.
Infants, older adults and people with suppressed immune systems or chronic illnesses may become severely dehydrated when they lose more fluids than they can replace. In that case, they may need to be hospitalized and receive intravenous fluids. In extreme cases, dehydration can be fatal.
Some types of food poisoning have potentially serious complications for certain people. These include:
Listeria infection. Complications of a listeria food poisoning may be most severe for an unborn baby. Early in pregnancy, a listeria infection may lead to miscarriage. Later in pregnancy, a listeria infection may lead to stillbirth, premature birth or a potentially fatal infection in the baby after birth — even if the mother was only mildly ill. Infants who survive a listeria infection may experience long-term neurological damage and delayed development.
Escherichia coli (E. coli). Certain E. coli strains can cause a serious complication called hemolytic uremic syndrome. This syndrome damages the lining of the tiny blood vessels in the kidneys, sometimes leading to kidney failure. Older adults, children younger than 5 and people with weakened immune systems have a higher risk of developing this complication. If you're in one of these risk categories, see your doctor at the first sign of profuse or bloody diarrhea.
Foot drop makes it difficult to lift the front part of your foot, so it might drag on the floor when you walk. This can cause you to raise your thigh when you walk, as though climbing stairs (steppage gait), to help your foot clear the floor. This unusual gait might cause you to slap your foot down onto the floor with each step. In some cases, the skin on the top of your foot and toes feels numb.
Depending on the cause, foot drop can affect one or both feet.
If your toes drag the floor when you walk, consult your doctor.
Foot drop is caused by weakness or paralysis of the muscles involved in lifting the front part of the foot. Causes of foot drop might include:
Nerve injury. The most common cause of foot drop is compression of a nerve in your leg that controls the muscles involved in lifting the foot (peroneal nerve). This nerve can also be injured during hip or knee replacement surgery, which may cause foot drop.
A nerve root injury — "pinched nerve" — in the spine can also cause foot drop. People who have diabetes are more susceptible to nerve disorders, which are associated with foot drop.
Muscle or nerve disorders. Various forms of muscular dystrophy, an inherited disease that causes progressive muscle weakness, can contribute to foot drop. So can other disorders, such as polio or Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
Brain and spinal cord disorders. Disorders that affect the spinal cord or brain — such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), multiple sclerosis or stroke — may cause foot drop.
The peroneal nerve controls the muscles that lift your foot. This nerve runs near the surface of your skin on the side of your knee closest to your hand. Activities that compress this nerve can increase your risk of foot drop. Examples include:
Crossing your legs. People who habitually cross their legs can compress the peroneal nerve on their uppermost leg.
Prolonged kneeling. Occupations that involve prolonged squatting or kneeling — such as picking strawberries or laying floor tile — can result in foot drop.
Wearing a leg cast. Plaster casts that enclose the ankle and end just below the knee can exert pressure on the peroneal nerve.
Frontal lobe seizures often last less than 30 seconds. In some cases, recovery is immediate.
Signs and symptoms of frontal lobe seizures might include: Head and eye movement to one side, Complete or partial unresponsiveness or difficulty speaking, Explosive screams, including profanities, or laughter, Abnormal body posturing, such as one arm extending while the other flexes, as if the person is posing like a fencer, Repetitive movements, such as rocking, bicycle pedaling or pelvic thrusting.
See your doctor if you're having signs or symptoms of a seizure. Call 911 or call for emergency medical help if you see someone having a seizure that lasts longer than five minutes.
Frontal lobe seizures, or frontal lobe epilepsy, can be caused by abnormalities — such as tumors, stroke, infection or traumatic injuries — in the brain's frontal lobes.
Frontal lobe seizures are also associated with a rare inherited disorder called autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy. If one of your parents has this form of epilepsy, you have a 50 percent chance of inheriting the abnormal gene that causes this disorder and developing the disease yourself.
For about half the people who have frontal lobe epilepsy, the cause remains unknown.
Signs and symptoms of frontotemporal dementia can be different from one individual to the next. Signs and symptoms get progressively worse over time, usually over years.
Clusters of symptom types tend to occur together, and people may have more than one cluster of symptom types.
The most common signs of frontotemporal dementia involve extreme changes in behavior and personality. These include: Increasingly inappropriate social behavior, Loss of empathy and other interpersonal skills, such as having sensitivity to another's feelings, Lack of judgment, Loss of inhibition, Lack of interest (apathy), which can be mistaken for depression, Repetitive compulsive behavior, such as tapping, clapping or smacking lips, A decline in personal hygiene, Changes in eating habits, usually overeating or developing a preference for sweets and carbohydrates, Eating inedible objects, Compulsively wanting to put things in the mouth.
Some subtypes of frontotemporal dementia lead to language problems or impairment or loss of speech. Primary progressive aphasia, semantic dementia and progressive agrammatic (nonfluent) aphasia are all considered to be frontotemporal dementia.
Problems caused by these conditions include: Increasing difficulty in using and understanding written and spoken language, such as having trouble finding the right word to use in speech or naming objects, Trouble naming things, possibly replacing a specific word with a more general word such as "it" for pen, No longer knowing word meanings, Having hesitant speech that may sound telegraphic, Making mistakes in sentence construction.
Rarer subtypes of frontotemporal dementia are characterized by problems with movement, similar to those associated with Parkinson's disease or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Movement-related problems may include: Tremor, Rigidity, Muscle spasms, Poor coordination, Difficulty swallowing, Muscle weakness, Inappropriate laughing or crying.
In frontotemporal dementia, the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain shrink. In addition, certain substances accumulate in the brain. What causes these changes is usually unknown.
There are genetic mutations that have been linked to frontotemporal dementia. But more than half of the people who develop frontotemporal dementia have no family history of dementia.
Recently, researchers have confirmed shared genetics and molecular pathways between frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). More research needs to be done to understand the connection between these conditions, however.
Your risk of developing frontotemporal dementia is higher if you have a family history of dementia. There are no other known risk factors.
Signs and symptoms of frostbite include: At first, cold skin and a prickling feeling, Numbness, Red, white, bluish-white or grayish-yellow skin, Hard or waxy-looking skin, Clumsiness due to joint and muscle stiffness, Blistering after rewarming, in severe cases.
Frostbite is most common on the fingers, toes, nose, ears, cheeks and chin. Because of skin numbness, you may not realize you have frostbite until someone else points it out.
Frostbite occurs in several stages:
Frostnip. Frostnip is a mild form of frostbite. Continued exposure leads to numbness in the affected area. As your skin warms, you may feel pain and tingling. Frostnip doesn't permanently damage the skin.
Superficial frostbite. Superficial frostbite appears as reddened skin that turns white or pale. Your skin may begin to feel warm — a sign of serious skin involvement. If you treat frostbite with rewarming at this stage, the surface of your skin may appear mottled. And you may notice stinging, burning and swelling. A fluid-filled blister may appear 12 to 36 hours after rewarming the skin.
Deep (severe) frostbite. As frostbite progresses, it affects all layers of the skin, including the tissues that lie below. Your skin turns white or bluish gray and you may experience numbness, losing all sensation of cold, pain or discomfort in the affected area. Joints or muscles may no longer work. Large blisters form 24 to 48 hours after rewarming. Afterward, the area turns black and hard as the tissue dies.
Seek medical attention for frostbite if you experience: Signs and symptoms of superficial or deep frostbite, Increased pain, swelling, redness or discharge in the area that was frostbitten, Fever, New, unexplained symptoms.
Get emergency medical help if you suspect hypothermia, a condition in which your body loses heat faster than it can be produced. Signs and symptoms of hypothermia include: Intense shivering, Slurred speech, Drowsiness and loss of coordination.
While you wait for your emergency medical help or a doctor's appointment, take appropriate self-care measures, such as: Protecting the affected area from further cold, Not walking on frostbitten feet, Reducing pain with ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others).
Frostbite occurs when skin and underlying tissues freeze. The most common cause of frostbite is exposure to cold-weather conditions. But it can also be caused by direct contact with ice, frozen metal or very cold liquids.
Specific conditions that lead to frostbite include:
Wearing clothing that isn't suitable for the conditions you're in — for example, it doesn't protect against cold, windy or wet weather or it's too tight.
Staying out in the cold and wind too long. Risk increases as air temperature falls below 5 F (minus 15 C), even with low wind speeds. In wind chill of minus 16.6 F (minus 27 C), frostbite can occur on exposed skin in less than 30 minutes.
Touching materials such as ice, cold packs or frozen metal.
The following factors increase the risk of frostbite: Medical conditions that affect your ability to feel or respond to cold, such as dehydration, excessive sweating, exhaustion, diabetes and poor blood flow in your limbs, Alcohol or drug abuse, Smoking, Fear, panic or mental illness, if it inhibits good judgment or hampers your ability to respond to cold, Previous frostbite or cold injury, Being an infant or older adult, both of whom may have a harder time producing and retaining body heat, Being at high altitude, which reduces the oxygen supply to your skin.
Complications of frostbite include: Increased sensitivity to cold, Increased risk of developing frostbite again, Long-term numbness in the affected area, Excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis), Changes in skin color, Changes in or loss of nails, Joint stiffness (frostbite arthritis), Growth defects in children, if frostbite damages a bone's growth plate, Infection, Tetanus, Gangrene — decay and death of tissue resulting from an interruption of blood flow to the affected area — which can result in amputation, Hypothermia.
Frozen shoulder typically develops slowly, and in three stages. Each stage can last a number of months.
Freezing stage. Any movement of your shoulder causes pain, and your shoulder's range of motion starts to become limited.
Frozen stage. Pain may begin to diminish during this stage. However, your shoulder becomes stiffer, and using it becomes more difficult.
Thawing stage. The range of motion in your shoulder begins to improve.
For some people, the pain worsens at night, sometimes disrupting sleep.
The bones, ligaments and tendons that make up your shoulder joint are encased in a capsule of connective tissue. Frozen shoulder occurs when this capsule thickens and tightens around the shoulder joint, restricting its movement.
Doctors aren't sure why this happens to some people, although it's more likely to occur in people who have diabetes or those who recently had to immobilize their shoulder for a long period, such as after surgery or an arm fracture.
Certain factors may increase your risk of developing frozen shoulder.
People 40 and older, particularly women, are more likely to have frozen shoulder.
People who've had prolonged immobility or reduced mobility of the shoulder are at higher risk of developing frozen shoulder. Immobility may be the result of many factors, including: Rotator cuff injury, Broken arm, Stroke, Recovery from surgery.
People who have certain diseases appear more likely to develop frozen shoulder. Diseases that might increase risk include: Diabetes, Overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism), Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), Cardiovascular disease, Tuberculosis, Parkinson's disease.
As the disease progresses, Fuchs' dystrophy symptoms, which usually affect both eyes, might include:
Blurred or cloudy vision, sometimes described as a general lack of clarity of vision.
Fluctuation in vision, with worse symptoms in the morning after awakening and gradually improving during the day. As the disease progresses, blurred vision either can take longer to improve or doesn't improve.
Glare, which can decrease your vision in dim and bright light.
Seeing halos around lights.
Pain or grittiness from tiny blisters on the surface of your cornea.
If you have some of these symptoms, and especially if they worsen over time, see an eye care provider, who might then refer you to a corneal specialist. If symptoms develop suddenly, call for an urgent appointment. Other eye conditions that cause the same symptoms as Fuchs' dystrophy also require prompt treatment.
Normally, the cells lining the inside of the cornea (endothelial cells) help maintain a healthy balance of fluid within the cornea and prevent the cornea from swelling. But with Fuchs' dystrophy, the endothelial cells gradually die or do not work well, resulting in fluid buildup (edema) within the cornea. This causes corneal thickening and blurred vision.
Fuchs' dystrophy is usually inherited. The genetic basis of the disease is complex — family members can be affected to varying degrees or not at all.
Factors that increase your risk of developing Fuchs' dystrophy include:
Sex. Fuchs' dystrophy is more common in women than in men.
Genetics. Having a family history of Fuchs' dystrophy increases your risk.
Age. Although there's a rare early-onset type of Fuchs' dystrophy that begins in childhood, typically the disease starts in the 30s and 40s, with symptoms developing thereafter.
Signs and symptoms of functional dyspepsia may include: A burning sensation or discomfort in your upper abdomen or lower chest, sometimes relieved by food or antacids, Bloating, Belching, An early feeling of fullness when eating, Nausea.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you experience persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
Seek immediate medical attention if you experience: Bloody vomit, Dark, tarry stools, Shortness of breath, Pain that radiates to your jaw, neck or arm, Unexplained weight loss.
It's not clear what causes functional dyspepsia. Doctors consider it a functional disorder, which means it's not found to be caused by a specific disease or diagnosable disorder.
Factors that can increase the risk of functional dyspepsia include: Female sex, Older age, Use of certain over-the-counter pain relievers, such as aspirin and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), which can cause stomach problems, Smoking, Anxiety or depression, History of childhood physical or sexual abuse.
Symptoms of functional neurologic disorders may vary, depending on the type of functional neurologic disorder, and they're significant enough to cause impairment and warrant medical evaluation. Symptoms can affect body movement and function and the senses.
Signs and symptoms that affect body movement and function may include: Weakness or paralysis, Abnormal movement, such as tremors or difficulty walking, Loss of balance, Difficulty swallowing or feeling "a lump in the throat", Seizures or episodes of shaking and apparent loss of consciousness (nonepileptic seizures), Episodes of unresponsiveness.
Signs and symptoms that affect the senses may include: Numbness or loss of the touch sensation, Speech problems, such as inability to speak or slurred speech, Vision problems, such as double vision or blindness, Hearing problems or deafness.
Seek medical attention for signs and symptoms listed above. If the underlying cause is a neurological disease or another medical condition, quick diagnosis and treatment may be important. If the diagnosis is a functional neurologic disorder, treatment may improve the symptoms and help prevent future problems.
The exact cause of functional neurologic disorders is unknown. Theories regarding what happens in the brain to result in symptoms are complex and involve multiple mechanisms that may differ, depending on the type of functional neurologic disorder.
Basically, parts of the brain that control the functioning of your muscles and senses may be involved, even though no disease or abnormality exists.
Symptoms of functional neurologic disorders may appear suddenly after a stressful event, or with emotional or physical trauma. Other triggers may include changes or disruptions in how the brain functions at the structural, cellular or metabolic level. But the trigger for symptoms can't always be identified.
Factors that may increase your risk of functional neurologic disorders include: Having a neurological disease or disorder, such as epilepsy, migraines or a movement disorder, Recent significant stress or emotional or physical trauma, Having a mental health condition, such as a mood or anxiety disorder, dissociative disorder or certain personality disorders, Having a family member with a functional neurologic disorder, Possibly, having a history of physical or sexual abuse or neglect in childhood.
Women may be more likely than men to develop functional neurologic disorders.
Some symptoms of functional neurologic disorders, particularly if not treated, can result in substantial disability and poor quality of life, similar to that caused by medical conditions or disease.
Signs and symptoms associated with galactorrhea include: Persistent or intermittent milky nipple discharge, Nipple discharge involving multiple milk ducts, Spontaneously leaked or manually expressed nipple discharge, One or both breasts affected, Absent or irregular menstrual periods, Headaches or vision problems.
If you have a persistent, spontaneous milky nipple discharge from one or both of your breasts and you're not pregnant or breast-feeding, make an appointment to see your doctor.
If breast stimulation — such as excessive nipple manipulation during sexual activity — triggers nipple discharge from multiple ducts, you have little cause for worry. The discharge probably doesn't signal anything abnormal, and this discharge often resolves on its own. If you have persistent discharge that doesn't go away, make an appointment with your doctor to get it checked out.
Nonmilky nipple discharge — particularly bloody, yellow or clear spontaneous discharge that comes from one duct or is associated with a lump you can feel — requires prompt medical attention, as it may be a sign of an underlying breast cancer.
Galactorrhea often results from having too much prolactin — the hormone responsible for milk production when you have a baby. Prolactin is produced by your pituitary gland, a small bean-shaped gland at the base of your brain that secretes and regulates several hormones.
Possible causes of galactorrhea include: Medications, such as certain sedatives, antidepressants, antipsychotics and high blood pressure drugs, Opioid use, Herbal supplements, such as fennel, anise or fenugreek seed, Birth control pills, A noncancerous pituitary tumor (prolactinoma) or other disorder of the pituitary gland, Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), Chronic kidney disease, Excessive breast stimulation, which may be associated with sexual activity, frequent breast self-exams with nipple manipulation or prolonged clothing friction, Nerve damage to the chest wall from chest surgery, burns or other chest injuries, Spinal cord surgery, injury or tumors, Stress.
Sometimes doctors can't find a cause for galactorrhea. This is called idiopathic galactorrhea, and it may just mean that your breast tissue is particularly sensitive to the milk-producing hormone prolactin in your blood. If you have increased sensitivity to prolactin, even normal prolactin levels can lead to galactorrhea.
In males, galactorrhea may be associated with testosterone deficiency (male hypogonadism) and usually occurs with breast enlargement or tenderness (gynecomastia). Erectile dysfunction and a lack of sexual desire also are associated with testosterone deficiency.
Galactorrhea sometimes occurs in newborns. High maternal estrogen levels cross the placenta into the baby's blood. This can cause enlargement of the baby's breast tissue, which may be associated with a milky nipple discharge. This milky discharge is temporary and resolves on its own. If the discharge is persistent, the newborn should be evaluated by a doctor.
Gallbladder cancer signs and symptoms may include: Abdominal pain, particularly in the upper right portion of the abdomen, Abdominal bloating, Fever, Losing weight without trying, Nausea, Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice).
Make an appointment with your doctor if you experience any signs or symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes gallbladder cancer.
Doctors know that gallbladder cancer forms when healthy gallbladder cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. These mutations cause cells to grow out of control and to continue living when other cells would normally die. The accumulating cells form a tumor that can grow beyond the gallbladder and spread to other areas of the body.
Most gallbladder cancer begins in the glandular cells that line the inner surface of the gallbladder. Gallbladder cancer that begins in this type of cell is called adenocarcinoma. This term refers to the way the cancer cells appear when examined under a microscope.
Factors that can increase the risk of gallbladder cancer include:
Your sex. Gallbladder cancer is more common in women.
Your age. Your risk of gallbladder cancer increases as you age.
A history of gallstones. Gallbladder cancer is most common in people who have had gallstones in the past. Still, gallbladder cancer is very rare in these people.
Other gallbladder diseases and conditions. Other gallbladder conditions that can increase the risk of gallbladder cancer include gallbladder polyps and chronic gallbladder infection.
Gallstones may cause no signs or symptoms. If a gallstone lodges in a duct and causes a blockage, the resulting signs and symptoms may include: Sudden and rapidly intensifying pain in the upper right portion of your abdomen, Sudden and rapidly intensifying pain in the center of your abdomen, just below your breastbone, Back pain between your shoulder blades, Pain in your right shoulder, Nausea or vomiting.
Gallstone pain may last several minutes to a few hours.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you.
Seek immediate care if you develop signs and symptoms of a serious gallstone complication, such as: Abdominal pain so intense that you can't sit still or find a comfortable position, Yellowing of your skin and the whites of your eyes (jaundice), High fever with chills.
It's not clear what causes gallstones to form. Doctors think gallstones may result when:
Your bile contains too much cholesterol. Normally, your bile contains enough chemicals to dissolve the cholesterol excreted by your liver. But if your liver excretes more cholesterol than your bile can dissolve, the excess cholesterol may form into crystals and eventually into stones.
Your bile contains too much bilirubin. Bilirubin is a chemical that's produced when your body breaks down red blood cells. Certain conditions cause your liver to make too much bilirubin, including liver cirrhosis, biliary tract infections and certain blood disorders. The excess bilirubin contributes to gallstone formation.
Your gallbladder doesn't empty correctly. If your gallbladder doesn't empty completely or often enough, bile may become very concentrated, contributing to the formation of gallstones.
Types of gallstones that can form in the gallbladder include:
Cholesterol gallstones. The most common type of gallstone, called a cholesterol gallstone, often appears yellow in color. These gallstones are composed mainly of undissolved cholesterol, but may contain other components.
Pigment gallstones. These dark brown or black stones form when your bile contains too much bilirubin.
Factors that may increase your risk of gallstones include: Being female, Being age 40 or older, Being a Native American, Being a Mexican American, Being overweight or obese, Being sedentary, Being pregnant, Eating a high-fat diet, Eating a high-cholesterol diet, Eating a low-fiber diet, Having a family history of gallstones, Having diabetes, Having certain blood disorders, such as sickle cell anemia or leukemia, Losing weight very quickly, Taking medications that contain estrogen, such as oral contraceptives or hormone therapy drugs, Having liver disease.
Complications of gallstones may include:
Inflammation of the gallbladder. A gallstone that becomes lodged in the neck of the gallbladder can cause inflammation of the gallbladder (cholecystitis). Cholecystitis can cause severe pain and fever.
Blockage of the common bile duct. Gallstones can block the tubes (ducts) through which bile flows from your gallbladder or liver to your small intestine. Severe pain, jaundice and bile duct infection can result.
Blockage of the pancreatic duct. The pancreatic duct is a tube that runs from the pancreas and connects to the common bile duct just before entering the duodenum. Pancreatic juices, which aid in digestion, flow through the pancreatic duct.
A gallstone can cause a blockage in the pancreatic duct, which can lead to inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis). Pancreatitis causes intense, constant abdominal pain and usually requires hospitalization.
Gallbladder cancer. People with a history of gallstones have an increased risk of gallbladder cancer. But gallbladder cancer is very rare, so even though the risk of cancer is elevated, the likelihood of gallbladder cancer is still very small.
The lumps associated with ganglion cysts can be characterized by:
Location. Ganglion cysts most commonly develop along the tendons or joints of your wrists or hands. The next most common locations are the ankles and feet. These cysts can occur near other joints as well.
Shape and size. Ganglion cysts are round or oval and usually measure less than an inch (2.5 centimeters) in diameter. Some are so small that they can't be felt. The size of a cyst can fluctuate, often getting larger when you use that joint for repetitive motions.
Pain. Ganglion cysts usually are painless. But if a cyst presses on a nerve — even if the cyst is too small to form a noticeable lump — it can cause pain, tingling, numbness or muscle weakness.
See your doctor if you experience a noticeable lump or pain in your wrist, hand, ankle or foot. He or she can make a diagnosis and determine whether you need treatment.
No one knows exactly what causes a ganglion cyst to develop. It grows out of a joint or the lining of a tendon, looking like a tiny water balloon on a stalk, and seems to occur when the tissue that surrounds a joint or a tendon bulges out of place. Inside the cyst is a thick lubricating fluid similar to that found in joints or around tendons.
Factors that may increase your risk of ganglion cysts include:
Your sex and age. Ganglion cysts can develop in anyone, but they most commonly occur in women between the ages of 20 and 40.
Osteoarthritis. People who have wear-and-tear arthritis in the finger joints closest to their fingernails are at higher risk of developing ganglion cysts near those joints.
Joint or tendon injury. Joints or tendons that have been injured in the past are more likely to develop ganglion cysts.
When gangrene affects your skin, signs and symptoms may include: Skin discoloration — ranging from pale to blue, purple, black, bronze or red, depending on the type of gangrene you have, Swelling or the formation of blisters filled with fluid on the skin, A clear line between healthy and damaged skin, Sudden, severe pain followed by a feeling of numbness, A foul-smelling discharge leaking from a sore, Thin, shiny skin, or skin without hair, Skin that feels cool or cold to the touch.
If you have a type of gangrene that affects tissues beneath the surface of your skin, such as gas gangrene or internal gangrene, you may notice that: The affected tissue is swollen and very painful, You're running a low-grade fever and generally feel unwell.
A condition called septic shock can occur if a bacterial infection that originated in the gangrenous tissue spreads throughout your body. Signs and symptoms of septic shock include: Low blood pressure, Fever, possibly, though temperature may also run lower than the normal 98.6 F (37 C), Rapid heart rate, Lightheadedness, Shortness of breath, Confusion.
Gangrene is a serious condition and needs immediate treatment. Call your doctor right away if you have persistent, unexplained pain in any area of your body along with one or more of the following signs and symptoms: Persistent fever, Skin changes — including discoloration, warmth, swelling, blisters or lesions — that won't go away, A foul-smelling discharge leaking from a sore, Sudden pain at the site of a recent surgery or trauma, Skin that's pale, hard, cold and numb.
Gangrene may occur due to one or some of the following causes:
Lack of blood supply. Your blood provides oxygen, nutrients to feed your cells, and immune system components, such as antibodies, to ward off infections. Without a proper blood supply, cells can't survive, and your tissue decays.
Infection. If bacteria thrive unchecked for long, infection can take over and cause your tissue to die, causing gangrene.
Trauma. Wounds that are traumatic, such as gunshot wounds or crushing injuries from car crashes, can cause bacteria to invade tissues deep within the body. When such tissues are infected, gangrene can occur.
Dry gangrene. Dry gangrene is characterized by dry and shriveled skin ranging in color from brown to purplish blue or black. Dry gangrene may develop slowly. It occurs most commonly in people who have arterial blood vessel disease, such as atherosclerosis, or in people who have diabetes.
Wet gangrene. Gangrene is referred to as "wet" if there's a bacterial infection in the affected tissue. Swelling, blistering and a wet appearance are common features of wet gangrene.
It may develop after a severe burn, frostbite or injury. It often occurs in people with diabetes who unknowingly injure a toe or foot. Wet gangrene needs to be treated immediately because it spreads quickly and can be fatal.
Gas gangrene. Gas gangrene typically affects deep muscle tissue. If you have gas gangrene, the surface of your skin may initially appear normal.
As the condition progresses, your skin may become pale and then evolve to a gray or purplish red color. A bubbly appearance to your skin may become apparent, and the affected skin may make a crackling sound when you press on it because of the gas within the tissue.
Gas gangrene is most commonly caused by infection with the bacterium Clostridium perfringens, which develops in an injury or surgical wound that's depleted of blood supply. The bacterial infection produces toxins that release gas — hence the name "gas" gangrene — and cause tissue death. Like wet gangrene, gas gangrene can be life-threatening.
Internal gangrene. Gangrene that affects one or more of your organs, such as your intestines, gallbladder or appendix, is called internal gangrene. This type of gangrene occurs when blood flow to an internal organ is blocked — for example, when your intestines bulge through a weakened area of muscle in your abdomen (hernia) and become twisted.
Internal gangrene may cause fever and severe pain. Left untreated, internal gangrene can be fatal.
Fournier's gangrene. Fournier's gangrene involves the genital organs. Men are more often affected, but women can develop this type of gangrene as well. Fournier's gangrene usually arises due to an infection in the genital area or urinary tract and causes genital pain, tenderness, redness and swelling.
Progressive bacterial synergistic gangrene (Meleney's gangrene). This rare type of gangrene typically occurs after an operation, with painful skin lesions developing one to two weeks after surgery.
Several factors increase your risk of developing gangrene. These include:
Diabetes. If you have diabetes, your body doesn't produce enough of the hormone insulin (which helps your cells take up blood sugar) or is resistant to the effects of insulin. High blood sugar levels can eventually damage blood vessels, decreasing or interrupting blood flow to a part of your body.
Blood vessel disease. Hardened and narrowed arteries (atherosclerosis) and blood clots also can block blood flow to an area of your body.
Severe injury or surgery. Any process that causes trauma to your skin and underlying tissue, including an injury or frostbite, increases your risk of developing gangrene, especially if you have an underlying condition that affects blood flow to the injured area.
Smoking. People who smoke have a higher risk of gangrene.
Obesity. Obesity often accompanies diabetes and vascular disease, but the stress of extra weight alone can also compress arteries, leading to reduced blood flow and increasing your risk of infection and poor wound healing.
Immunosuppression. If you have an infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or if you're undergoing chemotherapy or radiation therapy, your body's ability to fight off an infection is impaired.
Medications or drugs that are injected. In rare instances, certain medications and illegal drugs that are injected have been shown to cause infection with bacteria that cause gangrene.
Gangrene can lead to scarring or the need for reconstructive surgery. Sometimes, the amount of tissue death is so extensive that a body part, such as your foot, may need to be removed (amputated).
Gangrene that is infected with bacteria can spread quickly to other organs and may be fatal if left untreated.
Signs or symptoms of gas or gas pains include: Burping, Passing gas, Pain, cramps or a knotted feeling in your abdomen, A feeling of fullness or pressure in your abdomen (bloating), An observable increase in the size of your abdomen (distention).
Burping is normal, particularly during or right after a meal. Most people pass gas up to 20 times a day. Therefore, while having gas may be inconvenient or embarrassing, burping and passing gas are rarely by themselves a sign of a medical problem.
Talk to your doctor if your gas or gas pains are so persistent or severe that they interfere with your ability to function well in daily life. Gas or gas pains accompanied by other signs or symptoms may indicate more-serious conditions. See your doctor if you experience any of these additional signs or symptoms: Bloody stools, Change in consistency of stools, Change in frequency of bowel movements, Weight loss, Constipation or diarrhea, Persistent or recurrent nausea or vomiting.
Seek immediate care if you experience: Prolonged abdominal pain, Chest pain.
Gas in your stomach is primarily caused by swallowing air when you eat or drink. Most stomach gas is released when you burp.
Gas forms in your large intestine (colon) when bacteria ferment carbohydrates — fiber, some starches and some sugars — that aren't digested in your small intestine. Bacteria also consume some of that gas, but the remaining gas is released when you pass gas from your anus.
Certain high-fiber foods may cause gas, including: Beans and peas (legumes), Fruits, Vegetables, Whole grains.
While high-fiber foods increase gas production, fiber is essential for keeping your digestive tract in good working order and regulating blood sugar and cholesterol levels.
Other dietary factors that can contribute to increased gas in the digestive system include the following:
Carbonated beverages, such as soda and beer, increase stomach gas.
Eating habits, such as eating too quickly, drinking through a straw, chewing gum, sucking on candies or talking while chewing results in swallowing more air.
Fiber supplements containing psyllium, such as Metamucil, may increase colon gas.
Sugar substitutes, or artificial sweeteners, such as sorbitol, mannitol and xylitol, found in some sugar-free foods and beverages may cause excess colon gas.
Medical conditions that may increase intestinal gas, bloating or gas pain include the following:
Chronic intestinal disease. Excess gas is often a symptom of chronic intestinal conditions, such as diverticulitis, ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease.
Small bowel bacterial overgrowth. An increase or change in the bacteria in the small intestine can cause excess gas, diarrhea and weight loss.
Food intolerances. Gas or bloating may occur if your digestive system can't break down and absorb certain foods, such as the sugar in dairy products (lactose) or proteins such as gluten in wheat and other grains.
Constipation. Constipation may make it difficult to pass gas.
The signs and symptoms of gastritis include: Gnawing or burning ache or pain (indigestion) in your upper abdomen that may become either worse or better with eating, Nausea, Vomiting, A feeling of fullness in your upper abdomen after eating.
Gastritis doesn't always cause signs and symptoms.
Nearly everyone has had a bout of indigestion and stomach irritation. Most cases of indigestion are short-lived and don't require medical care. See your doctor if you have signs and symptoms of gastritis for a week or longer. Tell your doctor if your stomach discomfort occurs after taking prescription or over-the-counter drugs, especially aspirin or other pain relievers.
If you are vomiting blood, have blood in your stools or have stools that appear black, see your doctor right away to determine the cause.
Gastritis is an inflammation of the stomach lining. Weaknesses or injury to the mucus-lined barrier that protects your stomach wall allows your digestive juices to damage and inflame your stomach lining. A number of diseases and conditions can increase your risk of gastritis, including Crohn's disease and sarcoidosis, a condition in which collections of inflammatory cells grow in the body.
Factors that increase your risk of gastritis include:
Bacterial infection. Although infection with Helicobacter pylori is among the most common worldwide human infections, only some people with the infection develop gastritis or other upper gastrointestinal disorders. Doctors believe vulnerability to the bacterium could be inherited or could be caused by lifestyle choices, such as smoking and diet.
Regular use of pain relievers. Common pain relievers — such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen (Aleve, Anaprox) — can cause both acute gastritis and chronic gastritis. Using these pain relievers regularly or taking too much of these drugs may reduce a key substance that helps preserve the protective lining of your stomach.
Older age. Older adults have an increased risk of gastritis because the stomach lining tends to thin with age and because older adults are more likely to have H. pylori infection or autoimmune disorders than younger people are.
Excessive alcohol use. Alcohol can irritate and erode your stomach lining, which makes your stomach more vulnerable to digestive juices. Excessive alcohol use is more likely to cause acute gastritis.
Stress. Severe stress due to major surgery, injury, burns or severe infections can cause acute gastritis.
Your own body attacking cells in your stomach. Called autoimmune gastritis, this type of gastritis occurs when your body attacks the cells that make up your stomach lining. This reaction can wear away at your stomach's protective barrier.
Autoimmune gastritis is more common in people with other autoimmune disorders, including Hashimoto's disease and type 1 diabetes. Autoimmune gastritis can also be associated with vitamin B-12 deficiency.
Other diseases and conditions. Gastritis may be associated with other medical conditions, including HIV/AIDS, Crohn's disease and parasitic infections.
Left untreated, gastritis may lead to stomach ulcers and stomach bleeding. Rarely, some forms of chronic gastritis may increase your risk of stomach cancer, especially if you have extensive thinning of the stomach lining and changes in the lining's cells.
Tell your doctor if your signs and symptoms aren't improving despite treatment for gastritis.
Common signs and symptoms of GERD include: A burning sensation in your chest (heartburn), usually after eating, which might be worse at night, Chest pain, Difficulty swallowing, Regurgitation of food or sour liquid, Sensation of a lump in your throat.
If you have nighttime acid reflux, you might also experience: Chronic cough, Laryngitis, New or worsening asthma, Disrupted sleep.
Seek immediate medical care if you have chest pain, especially if you also have shortness of breath, or jaw or arm pain. These may be signs and symptoms of a heart attack.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you: Experience severe or frequent GERD symptoms, Take over-the-counter medications for heartburn more than twice a week.
GERD is caused by frequent acid reflux.
When you swallow, a circular band of muscle around the bottom of your esophagus (lower esophageal sphincter) relaxes to allow food and liquid to flow into your stomach. Then the sphincter closes again.
If the sphincter relaxes abnormally or weakens, stomach acid can flow back up into your esophagus. This constant backwash of acid irritates the lining of your esophagus, often causing it to become inflamed.
Conditions that can increase your risk of GERD include: Obesity, Bulging of the top of the stomach up into the diaphragm (hiatal hernia), Pregnancy, Connective tissue disorders, such as scleroderma, Delayed stomach emptying.
Factors that can aggravate acid reflux include: Smoking, Eating large meals or eating late at night, Eating certain foods (triggers) such as fatty or fried foods, Drinking certain beverages, such as alcohol or coffee, Taking certain medications, such as aspirin.
Over time, chronic inflammation in your esophagus can cause:
Narrowing of the esophagus (esophageal stricture). Damage to the lower esophagus from stomach acid causes scar tissue to form. The scar tissue narrows the food pathway, leading to problems with swallowing.
An open sore in the esophagus (esophageal ulcer). Stomach acid can wear away tissue in the esophagus, causing an open sore to form. An esophageal ulcer can bleed, cause pain and make swallowing difficult.
Precancerous changes to the esophagus (Barrett's esophagus). Damage from acid can cause changes in the tissue lining the lower esophagus. These changes are associated with an increased risk of esophageal cancer.
Signs and symptoms of GI bleeding can be either obvious (overt) or hidden (occult). Signs and symptoms depend on the location of the bleed, which can be anywhere on the GI tract, from where it starts — the mouth — to where it ends — the anus — and the rate of bleeding.
Overt bleeding might show up as: Vomiting blood, which might be red or might be dark brown and resemble coffee grounds in texture, Black, tarry stool, Rectal bleeding, usually in or with stool.
With occult bleeding, you might have: Lightheadedness, Difficulty breathing, Fainting, Chest pain, Abdominal pain.
If your bleeding starts abruptly and progresses rapidly, you could go into shock. Signs and symptoms of shock include: Drop in blood pressure, Not urinating or urinating infrequently, in small amounts, Rapid pulse, Unconsciousness.
If you have symptoms of shock, you or someone else should call 911 or your local emergency medical number. If you're vomiting blood, see blood in your stools or have black, tarry stools, seek immediate medical care. For other indications of GI bleeding, make an appointment with your doctor.
Gastrointestinal bleeding can occur either in the upper or lower gastrointestinal tract. It can have a number of causes.
Causes can include:
Peptic ulcer. This is the most common cause of upper GI bleeding. Peptic ulcers are sores that develop on the lining of the stomach and upper portion of the small intestine. Stomach acid, either from bacteria or use of anti-inflammatory drugs, damages the lining, leading to formation of sores.
Tears in the lining of the tube that connects your throat to your stomach (esophagus). Known as Mallory-Weiss tears, they can cause a lot of bleeding. These are most common in people who drink alcohol to excess.
Abnormal, enlarged veins in the esophagus (esophageal varices). This condition occurs most often in people with serious liver disease.
Esophagitis. This inflammation of the esophagus is most commonly caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Causes can include:
Diverticular disease. This involves the development of small, bulging pouches in the digestive tract (diverticulosis). If one or more of the pouches become inflamed or infected, it's called diverticulitis.
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). This includes ulcerative colitis, which causes inflammation and sores in the colon and rectum, and Crohn's disease, and inflammation of the lining of the digestive tract.
Tumors. Noncanerous (benign) or cancerous tumors of the esophagus, stomach, colon or rectum can weaken the lining of the digestive tract and cause bleeding.
Colon polyps. Small clumps of cells that form on the lining of your colon can cause bleeding. Most are harmless, but some might be cancerous or can become cancerous if not removed.
Hemorrhoids. These are swollen veins in your anus or lower rectum, similar to varicose veins.
Anal fissures. These are small tears in the lining of the anus.
Proctitis. Inflammation of the lining of the rectum can cause rectal bleeding.
A gastrointestinal bleed can cause: Shock, Anemia, Death.
Signs and symptoms of gastroparesis include: Vomiting, Nausea, Abdominal bloating, Abdominal pain, A feeling of fullness after eating just a few bites, Vomiting undigested food eaten a few hours earlier, Acid reflux, Changes in blood sugar levels, Lack of appetite, Weight loss and malnutrition.
Many people with gastroparesis don't have any noticeable signs and symptoms.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you.
It's not always clear what leads to gastroparesis, but in some cases it can be caused by damage to a nerve that controls the stomach muscles (vagus nerve).
The vagus nerve helps manage the complex processes in your digestive tract, including signaling the muscles in your stomach to contract and push food into the small intestine. A damaged vagus nerve can't send signals normally to your stomach muscles. This may cause food to remain in your stomach longer, rather than move into your small intestine to be digested.
The vagus nerve and its branches can be damaged by diseases, such as diabetes, or by surgery to the stomach or small intestine.
Factors that can increase your risk of gastroparesis: Diabetes, Abdominal or esophageal surgery, Infection, usually from a virus, Certain medications that slow the rate of stomach emptying, such as narcotic pain medications, Scleroderma — a connective tissue disease, Nervous system diseases, such as Parkinson's disease or multiple sclerosis, Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism).
Women are more likely to develop gastroparesis than are men.
There are different types of Gaucher disease, and signs and symptoms of disease vary widely, even within the same type. Type 1 is by far the most common.
Siblings, even identical twins, with the disease can have different levels of severity. Some people who have Gaucher disease have only mild or no symptoms.
Most people who have Gaucher disease have varying degrees of the following problems:
Abdominal complaints. Because the liver and especially the spleen can enlarge dramatically, the abdomen can become painfully distended.
Skeletal abnormalities. Gaucher disease can weaken bone, increasing the risk of painful fractures. It can also interfere with the blood supply to your bones, which can cause portions of the bone to die.
Blood disorders. A decrease in healthy red blood cells (anemia) can result in severe fatigue. Gaucher disease also affects the cells responsible for clotting, which can cause easy bruising and nosebleeds.
More rarely, Gaucher disease affects the brain, which can cause abnormal eye movements, muscle rigidity, swallowing difficulties and seizures. One rare subtype of Gaucher disease begins in infancy and typically results in death by 2 years of age.
If you or your child has the signs and symptoms associated with Gaucher disease, make an appointment with your doctor.
Gaucher disease is passed along in an inheritance pattern called autosomal recessive. Both parents must be carriers of a Gaucher changed (mutated) gene for their child to inherit the condition.
People of Eastern and Central European Jewish (Ashkenazi) ancestry are at higher risk of developing the most common variety of Gaucher disease.
Gaucher disease can result in: Delays in growth and puberty in children, Gynecological and obstetric problems, Parkinson's disease, Cancers such as myeloma, leukemia and lymphoma.
Gender dysphoria might cause adolescents and adults to experience: A marked difference between your inner gender identity and assigned gender lasting at least six months, as shown by at least two of the following:
    
A marked difference between your inner gender identity and primary and/or secondary sex characteristics, or anticipated secondary sex characteristics in young adolescents
A strong desire to be rid of primary and/or secondary sex characteristics because of a marked difference with your inner gender identity, or a desire to prevent the development of anticipated secondary sex characteristics in young adolescents
A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics of the other gender
A strong desire to be of the other gender or an alternate gender different from assigned gender
A strong desire to be treated as the other gender or an alternate gender different from assigned gender
A strong conviction that you have typical feelings and reactions of the other gender or an alternate gender different from assigned gender, Significant distress or impairment in social, occupational or other areas of functioning.
Gender dysphoria might start in childhood and continue into adolescence and adulthood (early onset). Or, you might have periods in which you no longer experience gender dysphoria followed by a recurrence of gender dysphoria. You might also experience gender dysphoria around the time of puberty or much later in life (late onset).
Gender dysphoria can impair many aspects of life. Preoccupation with being of another gender than the one assigned often interferes with daily activities. People experiencing gender dysphoria might refuse to go to school, due to pressure to dress in a way that's associated with their sex or out of fear of being harassed or teased. Gender dysphoria can also impair the ability to function at school or at work, resulting in school dropout or unemployment. Relationship difficulties are common. Anxiety, depression, self-harm, eating disorders, substance abuse and other problems can occur.
People who have gender dysphoria also often experience discrimination, resulting in minority stress. Access to health services and mental health services can be difficult, due to fear of stigma and a lack of experienced providers.
Adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria before gender reassignment might be at risk of suicidal ideation, suicide attempts and suicide. After gender reassignment, suicide risk might continue.
Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms can vary. They may include: Persistent worrying or anxiety about a number of areas that are out of proportion to the impact of the events, Overthinking plans and solutions to all possible worst-case outcomes, Perceiving situations and events as threatening, even when they aren't, Difficulty handling uncertainty, Indecisiveness and fear of making the wrong decision, Inability to set aside or let go of a worry, Inability to relax, feeling restless, and feeling keyed up or on edge, Difficulty concentrating, or the feeling that your mind "goes blank".
Physical signs and symptoms may include: Fatigue, Trouble sleeping, Muscle tension or muscle aches, Trembling, feeling twitchy, Nervousness or being easily startled, Sweating, Nausea, diarrhea or irritable bowel syndrome, Irritability.
There may be times when your worries don't completely consume you, but you still feel anxious even when there's no apparent reason. For example, you may feel intense worry about your safety or that of your loved ones, or you may have a general sense that something bad is about to happen.
Your anxiety, worry or physical symptoms cause you significant distress in social, work or other areas of your life. Worries can shift from one concern to another and may change with time and age.
Children and teenagers may have similar worries to adults, but also may have excessive worries about: Performance at school or sporting events, Family members' safety, Being on time (punctuality), Earthquakes, nuclear war or other catastrophic events.
A child or teen with excessive worry may: Feel overly anxious to fit in, Be a perfectionist, Redo tasks because they aren't perfect the first time, Spend excessive time doing homework, Lack confidence, Strive for approval, Require a lot of reassurance about performance, Have frequent stomachaches or other physical complaints, Avoid going to school or avoid social situations.
Some anxiety is normal, but see your doctor if: You feel like you're worrying too much, and it's interfering with your work, relationships or other parts of your life, You feel depressed or irritable, have trouble with drinking or drugs, or you have other mental health concerns along with anxiety, You have suicidal thoughts or behaviors — seek emergency treatment immediately.
Your worries are unlikely to simply go away on their own, and they may actually get worse over time. Try to seek professional help before your anxiety becomes severe — it may be easier to treat early on.
As with many mental health conditions, the cause of generalized anxiety disorder likely arises from a complex interaction of biological and environmental factors, which may include: Differences in brain chemistry and function, Genetics, Differences in the way threats are perceived, Development and personality.
Women are diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder somewhat more often than men are. The following factors may increase the risk of developing generalized anxiety disorder:
Personality. A person whose temperament is timid or negative or who avoids anything dangerous may be more prone to generalized anxiety disorder than others are.
Genetics. Generalized anxiety disorder may run in families.
Experiences. People with generalized anxiety disorder may have a history of significant life changes, traumatic or negative experiences during childhood, or a recent traumatic or negative event. Chronic medical illnesses or other mental health disorders may increase risk.
Having generalized anxiety disorder can be disabling. It can: Impair your ability to perform tasks quickly and efficiently because you have trouble concentrating, Take your time and focus from other activities, Sap your energy, Increase your risk of depression.
Generalized anxiety disorder can also lead to or worsen other physical health conditions, such as: Digestive or bowel problems, such as irritable bowel syndrome or ulcers, Headaches and migraines, Chronic pain and illness, Sleep problems and insomnia, Heart-health issues.
Generalized anxiety disorder often occurs along with other mental health problems, which can make diagnosis and treatment more challenging. Some mental health disorders that commonly occur with generalized anxiety disorder include: Phobias, Panic disorder, Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), Depression, Suicidal thoughts or suicide, Substance abuse.
In women, genital warts can grow on the vulva, the walls of the vagina, the area between the external genitals and the anus, the anal canal, and the cervix. In men, they may occur on the tip or shaft of the penis, the scrotum, or the anus.
Genital warts can also develop in the mouth or throat of a person who has had oral sexual contact with an infected person.
The signs and symptoms of genital warts include: Small, flesh-colored, brown or pink swellings in your genital area, A cauliflower-like shape caused by several warts close together, Itching or discomfort in your genital area, Bleeding with intercourse.
Genital warts can be so small and flat as to be invisible. Rarely, however, genital warts can multiply into large clusters, in someone with a supressed immune system.
See a doctor if you or your partner develops bumps or warts in the genital area.
The human papillomavirus (HPV) causes warts. There are more than 40 strains of HPV that affect the genital area.
Genital warts are almost always spread through sexual contact. Your warts don't have to be visible for you to spread the infection to your sexual partner.
Most people who are sexually active get infected with genital HPV at some time. Factors that can increase your risk of becoming infected include: Having unprotected sex with multiple partners, Having had another sexually transmitted infection, Having sex with a partner whose sexual history you don't know, Becoming sexually active at a young age, Having a compromised immune system, such as from HIV or drugs from an organ transplant.
HPV infection complications can include:
Cancer. Cervical cancer has been closely linked with genital HPV infection. Certain types of HPV also are associated with cancers of the vulva, anus, penis, and mouth and throat.
HPV infection doesn't always lead to cancer, but it's important for women to have regular Pap tests, particularly those who've been infected with higher risk types of HPV.
Problems during pregnancy. Rarely during pregnancy, warts can enlarge, making it difficult to urinate. Warts on the vaginal wall can inhibit the stretching of vaginal tissues during childbirth. Large warts on the vulva or in the vagina can bleed when stretched during delivery.
Extremely rarely, a baby born to a mother with genital warts develops warts in the throat. The baby might need surgery to keep the airway from being blocked.
Signs and symptoms of geographic tongue may include: Smooth, red, irregularly shaped patches (lesions) on the top or side of your tongue, Frequent changes in the location, size and shape of lesions, Discomfort, pain or burning sensation in some cases, most often related to eating spicy or acidic foods.
Many people with geographic tongue have no symptoms.
Geographic tongue can continue for days, months or years. The problem often resolves on its own but may appear again at a later time.
Geographic tongue is a minor — although sometimes uncomfortable — condition. However, lesions on the tongue may indicate other more-serious conditions of the tongue or diseases affecting the body in general. If you have lesions on the tongue that don't resolve within 10 days, see your doctor or dentist.
The cause of geographic tongue is unknown, and there's no way to prevent the condition. There may be a link between geographic tongue and psoriasis and between geographic tongue and lichen planus. But more research is needed to better understand possible connections.
Studies of factors that may be associated with an increased risk of geographic tongue have produced mixed results. Factors that are likely associated with an increased risk include:
Family history. Some people with geographic tongue have a family history of the disorder, so inherited genetic factors may increase risk.
Fissured tongue. People with geographic tongue often have another disorder called fissured tongue, which has the appearance of deep grooves (fissures) on the surface of the tongue.
Geographic tongue is a benign condition. It doesn't pose a threat to your health, cause long-term complications or increase your risk of major health problems.
However, anxiety about the condition is fairly common because: The appearance of the tongue may be embarrassing, depending on how visible the lesions are, It may be difficult to be reassured that there is, in fact, nothing seriously wrong.
For most women, gestational diabetes doesn't cause noticeable signs or symptoms. Increased thirst and more-frequent urination are possible symptoms.
If possible, seek health care early — when you first think about trying to get pregnant — so your doctor can check your risk of gestational diabetes along with your overall wellness. Once you're pregnant, your doctor will check you for gestational diabetes as part of your prenatal care.
If you develop gestational diabetes, you may need checkups more often. These are most likely to occur during the last three months of pregnancy, when your doctor will monitor your blood sugar level and your baby's health.
Researchers don't yet know why some women get gestational diabetes and others don't. Excess weight before pregnancy often plays a role.
Normally, various hormones work to keep your blood sugar levels in check. But during pregnancy, hormone levels change, making it harder for your body to process blood sugar efficiently. This makes your blood sugar rise.
Some women have a greater risk of gestational diabetes. Risk factors for gestational diabetes include the following:
Overweight and obesity.
A lack of physical activity.
Previous gestational diabetes or prediabetes.
Polycystic ovary syndrome.
Diabetes in an immediate family member.
Previously delivering a baby weighing more than 9 pounds (4.1 kilograms).
Race — Women who are Black, Hispanic, American Indian and Asian American have a higher risk of developing gestational diabetes.
Gestational diabetes that's not carefully managed can lead to high blood sugar levels. High blood sugar can cause problems for you and your baby, including an increased likelihood of needing a C-section to deliver.
If you have gestational diabetes, your baby may be at increased risk of:
Excessive birth weight. Higher than normal blood sugar in mothers can cause their babies to grow too large. Very large babies — those who weigh 9 pounds or more — are more likely to become wedged in the birth canal, have birth injuries or need a C-section birth.
Early (preterm) birth. High blood sugar may increase women's risk of early labor and delivery before the due date. Or early delivery may be recommended because the baby is large.
Serious breathing difficulties. Babies born early to mothers with gestational diabetes may experience respiratory distress syndrome — a condition that makes breathing difficult.
Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). Sometimes babies of mothers with gestational diabetes have low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) shortly after birth. Severe episodes of hypoglycemia may cause seizures in the baby. Prompt feedings and sometimes an intravenous glucose solution can return the baby's blood sugar level to normal.
Obesity and type 2 diabetes later in life. Babies of mothers who have gestational diabetes have a higher risk of developing obesity and type 2 diabetes later in life.
Stillbirth. Untreated gestational diabetes can result in a baby's death either before or shortly after birth.
Gestational diabetes may also increase your risk of:
High blood pressure and preeclampsia. Gestational diabetes raises your risk of high blood pressure, as well as preeclampsia — a serious complication of pregnancy that causes high blood pressure and other symptoms that can threaten the lives of both mother and baby.
Having a surgical delivery (C-section). You're more likely to have a C-section if you have gestational diabetes.
Future diabetes. If you have gestational diabetes, you're more likely to get it again during a future pregnancy. You also have a higher risk of type 2 diabetes as you get older.
The most common symptoms of giant cell arteritis are head pain and tenderness — often severe — that usually affects both temples. Head pain can progressively worsen, come and go, or subside temporarily.
Generally, signs and symptoms of giant cell arteritis include: Persistent, severe head pain, usually in your temple area, Scalp tenderness, Jaw pain when you chew or open your mouth wide, Fever, Fatigue, Unintended weight loss, Vision loss or double vision, particularly in people who also have jaw pain, Sudden, permanent loss of vision in one eye.
Pain and stiffness in the neck, shoulders or hips are common symptoms of a related disorder, polymyalgia rheumatica. About 50 percent of people with giant cell arteritis also have polymyalgia rheumatica.
If you develop a new, persistent headache or any of the signs and symptoms listed above, see your doctor without delay. If you're diagnosed with giant cell arteritis, starting treatment as soon as possible can usually help prevent vision loss.
With giant cell arteritis, the lining of arteries becomes inflamed, causing them to swell. This swelling narrows your blood vessels, reducing the amount of blood — and, therefore, oxygen and vital nutrients — that reaches your body's tissues.
Almost any large or medium-sized artery can be affected, but swelling most often occurs in the arteries in the temples. These are just in front of your ears and continue up into your scalp.
What causes these arteries to become inflamed isn't known, but it's thought to involve abnormal attacks on artery walls by the immune system. Certain genes and environmental factors might increase your susceptibility to the condition.
Several factors can increase your risk of developing giant cell arteritis, including:
Age. Giant cell arteritis affects adults only, and rarely those under 50. Most people with this condition develop signs and symptoms between the ages of 70 and 80.
Sex. Women are about two times more likely to develop the condition than men are.
Race and geographic region. Giant cell arteritis is most common among white people in Northern European populations or of Scandinavian descent.
Polymyalgia rheumatica. Having polymyalgia rheumatica puts you at increased risk of developing giant cell arteritis.
Family history. Sometimes the condition runs in families.
Giant cell arteritis can cause serious complications, including:
Blindness. Diminished blood flow to your eyes can cause sudden, painless vision loss in one or, rarely, both eyes. Loss of vision is usually permanent.
Aortic aneurysm. An aneurysm is a bulge that forms in a weakened blood vessel, usually in the large artery that runs down the center of your chest and abdomen (aorta). An aortic aneurysm might burst, causing life-threatening internal bleeding.
Because this complication can occur even years after the diagnosis of giant cell arteritis, your doctor might monitor your aorta with annual chest X-rays or other imaging tests, such as ultrasound and CT.
Stroke. This is an uncommon complication of giant cell arteritis.
Some people with giardia infection never develop signs or symptoms but still carry the parasite and can spread it to others through their stool. For those who do get sick, signs and symptoms usually appear one to three weeks after exposure and may include: Watery, sometimes foul-smelling diarrhea that may alternate with soft, greasy stools, Fatigue or malaise, Abdominal cramps and bloating, Gas or flatulence, Nausea, Weight loss.
Signs and symptoms of giardia infection may last two to six weeks, but in some people they last longer or recur.
Call your doctor if you have loose stools, abdominal bloating and nausea lasting more than a week, or if you become dehydrated. Be sure to tell your doctor if you're at risk of giardia infection — that is, you have a child in child care, you've recently traveled to an endemic area, or you've swallowed water from a lake or stream.
Giardia parasites live in the intestines of people and animals. Before the microscopic parasites are passed in stool, they become encased within hard shells called cysts, which allows them to survive outside the intestines for months. Once inside a host, the cysts dissolve and the parasites are released.
Infection occurs when you accidentally ingest the parasite cysts. This can occur by swallowing contaminated water, by eating contaminated food or through person-to-person contact.
The most common way to become infected with giardia is after swallowing contaminated water. Giardia parasites are found in lakes, ponds, rivers and streams worldwide, as well as in municipal water supplies, wells, cisterns, swimming pools, water parks and spas. Ground and surface water can become contaminated from agricultural runoff, wastewater discharge or animal feces. Children in diapers and people with diarrhea may accidentally contaminate pools and spas.
Giardia parasites can be transmitted through food — either because food handlers with giardiasis don't wash their hands thoroughly or because raw produce is irrigated or washed with contaminated water. Because cooking food kills giardia, food is a less common source of infection than water is, especially in industrialized countries.
You can contract giardiasis if your hands become contaminated with fecal matter — parents changing a child's diapers are especially at risk. So are child care workers and children in child care centers, where outbreaks are increasingly common. The giardia parasite can also spread through anal sex.
The giardia parasite is a very common intestinal parasite. Although anyone can pick up giardia parasites, some people are especially at risk:
Children. Giardia infection is far more common in children than it is in adults. Children are more likely to come in contact with feces, especially if they wear diapers, are toilet training or spend time in a child care center. People who live or work with small children also are at higher risk of developing giardia infection.
People without access to safe drinking water. Giardiasis is rampant wherever sanitation is inadequate or water isn't safe to drink. You're at risk if you travel to places where giardiasis is common, especially if you aren't careful about what you eat and drink. The risk is greatest in rural or wilderness areas.
People who have anal sex. Having anal sex without using a condom puts you at increased risk of giardia infection, as well as sexually transmitted infections.
Giardia infection is almost never fatal in industrialized countries, but it can cause lingering symptoms and serious complications, especially in infants and children. The most common complications include:
Dehydration. Often a result of severe diarrhea, dehydration occurs when the body doesn't have enough water to carry out its normal functions.
Failure to thrive. Chronic diarrhea from giardia infection can lead to malnutrition and harm children's physical and mental development.
Lactose intolerance. Many people with giardia infection develop lactose intolerance — the inability to properly digest milk sugar. The problem may persist long after the infection has cleared.
The most frequent sign of Gilbert's syndrome is an occasional yellowish tinge of the skin and the whites of the eyes as a result of the slightly elevated levels of bilirubin in the blood. In people with Gilbert's syndrome, bilirubin levels may increase and jaundice may become apparent because of: Illness, such as a cold or the flu, Fasting or eating a very low-calorie diet, Dehydration, Menstruation, Stress, Strenuous exercise, Lack of sleep.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have jaundice, which has many possible causes.
An abnormal gene you inherit from your parents causes Gilbert's syndrome. The gene normally controls an enzyme that helps break down bilirubin in your liver. When you have an ineffective gene, your blood contains excess amounts of bilirubin because your body doesn't produce enough of the enzyme.
Bilirubin is a yellowish pigment made when your body breaks down old red blood cells. Bilirubin travels through your bloodstream to the liver, where the enzyme breaks down the pigment and removes it from the bloodstream.
The bilirubin passes from the liver into the intestines with bile. It's then excreted in stool. A small amount of bilirubin remains in the blood.
The abnormal gene that causes Gilbert's syndrome is common. Many people carry one copy of this gene. In most cases, two abnormal copies are needed to cause Gilbert's syndrome.
Although it's present from birth, Gilbert's syndrome usually isn't noticed until puberty or later, since bilirubin production increases during puberty. You have an increased risk of Gilbert's syndrome if: Both your parents carry the abnormal gene that causes the disorder, You're male.
The low level of the bilirubin-processing enzyme that causes Gilbert's syndrome may also increase the side effects of certain medications, since this enzyme plays a role in helping clear these medications from your body.
These medications include: Irinotecan (Camptosar), a cancer chemotherapy drug, Some protease inhibitors used to treat HIV.
If you have Gilbert's syndrome, talk to your doctor before taking new medications. Also, having any other condition that impairs the destruction of red blood cells may increase your risk of developing gallstones.
Healthy gums are firm and pale pink and fitted tightly around the teeth. Signs and symptoms of gingivitis include: Swollen or puffy gums, Dusky red or dark red gums, Gums that bleed easily when you brush or floss, Bad breath, Receding gums, Tender gums.
If you notice any signs and symptoms of gingivitis, schedule an appointment with your dentist. The sooner you seek care, the better your chances of reversing damage from gingivitis and preventing its progression to periodontitis.
The most common cause of gingivitis is poor oral hygiene that encourages plaque to form on teeth, causing inflammation of the surrounding gum tissues. Here's how plaque can lead to gingivitis:
Plaque forms on your teeth. Plaque is an invisible, sticky film composed mainly of bacteria that forms on your teeth when starches and sugars in food interact with bacteria normally found in your mouth. Plaque requires daily removal because it re-forms quickly.
Plaque turns into tartar. Plaque that stays on your teeth can harden under your gumline into tartar (calculus), which collects bacteria. Tartar makes plaque more difficult to remove, creates a protective shield for bacteria and causes irritation along the gumline. You need professional dental cleaning to remove tartar.
Gingiva become inflamed (gingivitis). The longer that plaque and tartar remain on your teeth, the more they irritate the gingiva, the part of your gum around the base of your teeth, causing inflammation. In time, your gums become swollen and bleed easily. Tooth decay (dental caries) also may result. If not treated, gingivitis can advance to periodontitis and eventual tooth loss.
Gingivitis is common, and anyone can develop it. Factors that can increase your risk of gingivitis include: Poor oral care habits, Smoking or chewing tobacco, Older age, Dry mouth, Poor nutrition, including vitamin C deficiency, Dental restorations that don't fit properly or crooked teeth that are difficult to clean, Conditions that decrease immunity such as leukemia, HIV/AIDS or cancer treatment, Certain drugs, such as phenytoin (Dilantin, Phenytek) for epileptic seizures, and some calcium channel blockers, used for angina, high blood pressure and other conditions, Hormonal changes, such as those related to pregnancy, menstrual cycle or use of birth control pills, Genetics, Medical conditions such as certain viral and fungal infections.
Untreated gingivitis can progress to gum disease that spreads to underlying tissue and bone (periodontitis), a much more serious condition that can lead to tooth loss.
Chronic gingiva inflammation has been thought to be associated with some systemic diseases such as respiratory disease, diabetes, coronary artery disease, stroke and rheumatoid arthritis. Some research suggests that the bacteria responsible for periodontitis can enter your bloodstream through gum tissue, possibly affecting your heart, lungs and other parts of your body. But more studies are needed to confirm a link.
Trench mouth, also known as necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (NUG), is a severe form of gingivitis that causes painful, infected, bleeding gums and ulcerations. Trench mouth is rare today in developed nations, though it's common in developing countries that have poor nutrition and poor living conditions.
The signs and symptoms of glaucoma vary depending on the type and stage of your condition. For example: Patchy blind spots in your side (peripheral) or central vision, frequently in both eyes, Tunnel vision in the advanced stages.
Severe headache, Eye pain, Nausea and vomiting, Blurred vision, Halos around lights, Eye redness.
If left untreated, glaucoma will eventually cause blindness. Even with treatment, about 15 percent of people with glaucoma become blind in at least one eye within 20 years.
Promptly go to an emergency room or an eye doctor's (ophthalmologist's) office if you experience some of the symptoms of acute angle-closure glaucoma, such as severe headache, eye pain and blurred vision.
Glaucoma is the result of damage to the optic nerve. As this nerve gradually deteriorates, blind spots develop in your visual field. For reasons that doctors don't fully understand, this nerve damage is usually related to increased pressure in the eye.
Elevated eye pressure is due to a buildup of a fluid (aqueous humor) that flows throughout the inside of your eye. This internal fluid normally drains out through a tissue called the trabecular meshwork at the angle where the iris and cornea meet. When fluid is overproduced or the drainage system doesn't work properly, the fluid can't flow out at its normal rate and eye pressure increases.
Glaucoma tends to run in families. In some people, scientists have identified genes related to high eye pressure and optic nerve damage.
Types of glaucoma include:
Open-angle glaucoma is the most common form of the disease. The drainage angle formed by the cornea and iris remains open, but the trabecular meshwork is partially blocked. This causes pressure in the eye to gradually increase. This pressure damages the optic nerve. It happens so slowly that you may lose vision before you're even aware of a problem.
Angle-closure glaucoma, also called closed-angle glaucoma, occurs when the iris bulges forward to narrow or block the drainage angle formed by the cornea and iris. As a result, fluid can't circulate through the eye and pressure increases. Some people have narrow drainage angles, putting them at increased risk of angle-closure glaucoma.
Angle-closure glaucoma may occur suddenly (acute angle-closure glaucoma) or gradually (chronic angle-closure glaucoma). Acute angle-closure glaucoma is a medical emergency.
In normal-tension glaucoma, your optic nerve becomes damaged even though your eye pressure is within the normal range. No one knows the exact reason for this. You may have a sensitive optic nerve, or you may have less blood being supplied to your optic nerve. This limited blood flow could be caused by atherosclerosis — the buildup of fatty deposits (plaque) in the arteries — or other conditions that impair circulation.
It's possible for infants and children to have glaucoma. It may be present from birth or develop in the first few years of life. The optic nerve damage may be caused by drainage blockages or an underlying medical condition.
In pigmentary glaucoma, pigment granules from your iris build up in the drainage channels, slowing or blocking fluid exiting your eye. Activities such as jogging sometimes stir up the pigment granules, depositing them on the trabecular meshwork and causing intermittent pressure elevations.
Because chronic forms of glaucoma can destroy vision before any signs or symptoms are apparent, be aware of these risk factors: Having high internal eye pressure (intraocular pressure), Being over age 60, Being black, Asian or Hispanic, Having a family history of glaucoma, Having certain medical conditions, such as diabetes, heart disease, high blood pressure and sickle cell anemia, Having corneas that are thin in the center, Being extremely nearsighted or farsighted, Having had an eye injury or certain types of eye surgery, Taking corticosteroid medications, especially eyedrops, for a long time.
Signs and symptoms of glomerulonephritis depend on whether you have the acute or chronic form and the cause. Your first indication that something is wrong might come from symptoms or from the results of a routine urinalysis.
Glomerulonephritis signs and symptoms include: Pink or cola-colored urine from red blood cells in your urine (hematuria), Foamy urine due to excess protein (proteinuria), High blood pressure (hypertension), Fluid retention (edema) with swelling evident in your face, hands, feet and abdomen.
Make an appointment with your doctor promptly if you have signs or symptoms that concern you.
Many conditions can cause glomerulonephritis. Sometimes the disease runs in families and sometimes the cause is unknown. Conditions that can lead to inflammation of the kidneys' glomeruli include:
Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis. Glomerulonephritis may develop a week or two after recovery from a strep throat infection or, rarely, a skin infection (impetigo). To fight the infection, your body produces extra antibodies that can eventually settle in the glomeruli, causing inflammation.
Children are more likely to develop post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis than are adults, and they're also more likely to recover quickly.
Bacterial endocarditis. Bacteria occasionally can spread through your bloodstream and lodge in your heart, causing an infection of one or more of your heart valves. You're at greater risk of this condition if you have a heart defect, such as a damaged or artificial heart valve. Bacterial endocarditis is associated with glomerular disease, but the connection between the two is unclear.
Viral infections. Viral infections, such as the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and hepatitis C, can trigger glomerulonephritis.
Lupus. A chronic inflammatory disease, lupus can affect many parts of your body, including your skin, joints, kidneys, blood cells, heart and lungs.
Goodpasture's syndrome. A rare immunological lung disorder that can mimic pneumonia, Goodpasture's syndrome causes bleeding in your lungs as well as glomerulonephritis.
IgA nephropathy. Characterized by recurrent episodes of blood in the urine, this primary glomerular disease results from deposits of immunoglobulin A (IgA) in the glomeruli. IgA nephropathy can progress for years with no noticeable symptoms.
Polyarteritis. This form of vasculitis affects small and medium blood vessels in many parts of your body, such as your heart, kidneys and intestines.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis. This form of vasculitis, formerly known as Wegener's granulomatosis, affects small and medium blood vessels in your lungs, upper airways and kidneys.
High blood pressure. This can damage your kidneys and impair their ability to function normally. Glomerulonephritis can also lead to high blood pressure because it reduces kidney function and can influence how your kidneys handle sodium.
Diabetic kidney disease (diabetic nephropathy). This can affect anyone with diabetes, usually taking years to develop. Good control of blood sugar levels and blood pressure might prevent or slow kidney damage.
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Characterized by scattered scarring of some of the glomeruli, this condition can result from another disease or occur for no known reason.
Infrequently, chronic glomerulonephritis runs in families. One inherited form, Alport syndrome, also might impair hearing or vision.
In addition to the causes listed above, glomerulonephritis is associated with certain cancers, such as multiple myeloma, lung cancer and chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Glomerulonephritis can damage your kidneys so that they lose their filtering ability. As a result, dangerous levels of fluid, electrolytes and waste build up in your body.
Possible complications of glomerulonephritis include:
Acute kidney failure. Loss of function in the filtering part of the nephron can result in rapid accumulation of waste products. You might need emergency dialysis — an artificial means of removing extra fluids and waste from your blood — typically by an artificial kidney machine.
Chronic kidney disease. Your kidneys gradually lose their filtering ability. Kidney function that deteriorates to less than 10 percent of normal capacity results in end-stage kidney disease, which requires dialysis or a kidney transplant to sustain life.
High blood pressure. Damage to your kidneys and the resulting buildup of wastes in the bloodstream can raise your blood pressure.
Nephrotic syndrome. With this syndrome, too much protein in your urine results in too little protein in your blood. Nephrotic syndrome can be associated with high blood cholesterol and swelling (edema) of the eyelids, feet and abdomen.
Not all goiters cause signs and symptoms. When signs and symptoms do occur they may include: A swelling at the base of your neck that may be particularly obvious when you shave or put on makeup, A tight feeling in your throat, Coughing, Hoarseness, Difficulty swallowing, Difficulty breathing.
Your thyroid gland produces two main hormones — thyroxine (T-4) and triiodothyronine (T-3). These hormones circulate in your bloodstream and help regulate your metabolism. They maintain the rate at which your body uses fats and carbohydrates, help control your body temperature, influence your heart rate, and help regulate the production of proteins.
Your thyroid gland also produces calcitonin — a hormone that helps regulate the amount of calcium in your blood.
Your pituitary gland and hypothalamus control the rate at which T-4 and T-3 are produced and released.
The hypothalamus — an area at the base of your brain that acts as a thermostat for your whole system — signals your pituitary gland to make a hormone known as thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Your pituitary gland — also located at the base of your brain — releases a certain amount of TSH, depending on how much thyroxine and T-3 are in your blood. Your thyroid gland, in turn, regulates its production of hormones based on the amount of TSH it receives from the pituitary gland.
Having a goiter doesn't necessarily mean that your thyroid gland isn't working normally. Even when it's enlarged, your thyroid may produce normal amounts of hormones. It might also, however, produce too much or too little thyroxine and T-3.
Several things can cause your thyroid gland to enlarge. Some of the most common are:
Iodine deficiency. Iodine is essential for the production of thyroid hormones, and is found primarily in seawater and in the soil in coastal areas. In the developing world, people who live inland or at high elevations are often iodine deficient and can develop goiters when the thyroid enlarges in an effort to obtain more iodine. Iodine deficiency may be made worse by a diet high in hormone-inhibiting foods, such as cabbage, broccoli and cauliflower.
In countries where iodine is routinely added to table salt and other foods, a lack of dietary iodine isn't usually the cause of goiters.
Graves' disease. A goiter can sometimes occur when your thyroid gland produces too much thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism). In someone who has Graves' disease, antibodies produced by the immune system mistakenly attack the thyroid gland, causing it to produce excess thyroxine. This overstimulation causes the thyroid to swell.
Hashimoto's disease. A goiter can also result from an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism). Like Graves' disease, Hashimoto's disease is an autoimmune disorder. But instead of causing your thyroid to produce too much hormone, Hashimoto's damages your thyroid so that it produces too little.
Sensing a low hormone level, your pituitary gland produces more TSH to stimulate the thyroid, which then causes the gland to enlarge.
Multinodular goiter. In this condition, several solid or fluid-filled lumps called nodules develop in both sides of your thyroid, resulting in overall enlargement of the gland.
Solitary thyroid nodules. In this case, a single nodule develops in one part of your thyroid gland. Most nodules are noncancerous (benign) and don't lead to cancer.
Thyroid cancer. Thyroid cancer is far less common than benign thyroid nodules. A biopsy of a thyroid nodule is very accurate in determining whether it's cancerous.
Pregnancy. A hormone produced during pregnancy, human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), may cause your thyroid gland to enlarge slightly.
Inflammation. Thyroiditis is an inflammatory condition that can cause pain and swelling in the thyroid. It may also cause the body to produce too much or too little thyroxine.
Goiters can affect anyone. They may be present at birth and occur at any time throughout life. Some common risk factors for goiters include:
A lack of dietary iodine. People living in areas where iodine is in short supply and who don't have access to iodine supplements are at high risk of goiters.
Being female. Because women are more prone to thyroid disorders, they're also more likely to develop goiters.
Your age. Goiters are more common after age 40.
Medical history. A personal or family history of autoimmune disease increases your risk.
Pregnancy and menopause. For reasons that aren't entirely clear, thyroid problems are more likely to occur during pregnancy and menopause.
Certain medications. Some medical treatments, including the heart drug amiodarone (Pacerone, others) and the psychiatric drug lithium (Lithobid, others), increase your risk.
Radiation exposure. Your risk increases if you've had radiation treatments to your neck or chest area or you've been exposed to radiation in a nuclear facility, test or accident.
Small goiters that don't cause physical or cosmetic problems aren't a concern. But large goiters can make it hard to breathe or swallow and can cause a cough and hoarseness.
Goiters that result from other conditions, such as hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism, may be associated with a number of symptoms, ranging from fatigue and weight gain to unintended weight loss, irritability and trouble sleeping.
Golfer's elbow is characterized by:
Pain and tenderness. Usually felt on the inner side of your elbow, the pain sometimes extends along the inner side of your forearm. Pain typically worsens with certain movements.
Stiffness. Your elbow may feel stiff, and making a fist might hurt.
Weakness. You may have weakness in your hands and wrists.
Numbness or tingling. These sensations might radiate into one or more fingers — usually the ring and little fingers.
The pain of golfer's elbow can come on suddenly or gradually. The pain might worsen with certain movements, such as swinging a golf club.
Consult your doctor if rest, ice and over-the-counter pain relievers don't ease your elbow pain and tenderness. Seek immediate care if: Your elbow is hot and inflamed, and you have a fever, You can't bend your elbow, Your elbow looks deformed, You suspect you've broken a bone.
Golfer's elbow, also known as medial epicondylitis, is caused by damage to the muscles and tendons that control your wrist and fingers. The damage is typically related to excess or repeated stress — especially forceful wrist and finger motions. Improper lifting, throwing or hitting, as well as too little warmup or poor conditioning, also can contribute to golfer's elbow.
Besides golf, many activities and occupations can lead to golfer's elbow, including:
Racket sports. Improper technique with tennis strokes, especially the backhand, can cause injury to the tendon. Excessive use of topspin and using a racket that's too small or heavy also can lead to injury.
Throwing sports. Improper pitching technique in baseball or softball can be another culprit. Football, archery and javelin throwing also can cause golfer's elbow.
Weight training. Lifting weights using improper technique, such as curling the wrists during a biceps exercise, can overload the elbow muscles and tendons.
Forceful, repetitive occupational movements. These occur in fields such as construction, plumbing and carpentry
To cause golfer's elbow, the activity generally needs to be done for more than an hour a day on many days.
You could be at higher risk of developing golfer's elbow if you're: Age 40 or older, Performing repetitive activity at least two hours a day, Obese, A smoker.
In many cases, gonorrhea infection causes no symptoms. Symptoms, however, can affect many sites in your body, but commonly appear in the genital tract.
Signs and symptoms of gonorrhea infection in men include: Painful urination, Pus-like discharge from the tip of the penis, Pain or swelling in one testicle.
Signs and symptoms of gonorrhea infection in women include: Increased vaginal discharge, Painful urination, Vaginal bleeding between periods, such as after vaginal intercourse, Abdominal or pelvic pain.
Gonorrhea can also affect these parts of the body:
Rectum. Signs and symptoms include anal itching, pus-like discharge from the rectum, spots of bright red blood on toilet tissue and having to strain during bowel movements.
Eyes. Gonorrhea that affects your eyes can cause eye pain, sensitivity to light, and pus-like discharge from one or both eyes.
Throat. Signs and symptoms of a throat infection might include a sore throat and swollen lymph nodes in the neck.
Joints. If one or more joints become infected by bacteria (septic arthritis), the affected joints might be warm, red, swollen and extremely painful, especially during movement.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice any troubling signs or symptoms, such as a burning sensation when you urinate or a pus-like discharge from your penis, vagina or rectum.
Also make an appointment with your doctor if your partner has been diagnosed with gonorrhea. You may not experience signs or symptoms that prompt you to seek medical attention. But without treatment, you can reinfect your partner even after he or she has been treated for gonorrhea.
Gonorrhea is caused by the bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae. The gonorrhea bacteria are most often passed from one person to another during sexual contact, including oral, anal or vaginal intercourse.
Sexually active women younger than 25 and men who have sex with men are at increased risk of getting gonorrhea.
Other factors that can increase your risk include: Having a new sex partner, Having a sex partner who has other partners, Having more than one sex partner, Having had gonorrhea or another sexually transmitted infection.
Untreated gonorrhea can lead to major complications, such as:
Infertility in women. Gonorrhea can spread into the uterus and fallopian tubes, causing pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). PID can result in scarring of the tubes, greater risk of pregnancy complications and infertility. PID requires immediate treatment.
Infertility in men. Gonorrhea can cause a small, coiled tube in the rear portion of the testicles where the sperm ducts are located (epididymis) to become inflamed (epididymitis). Untreated epididymitis can lead to infertility.
Infection that spreads to the joints and other areas of your body. The bacterium that causes gonorrhea can spread through the bloodstream and infect other parts of your body, including your joints. Fever, rash, skin sores, joint pain, swelling and stiffness are possible results.
Increased risk of HIV/AIDS. Having gonorrhea makes you more susceptible to infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the virus that leads to AIDS. People who have both gonorrhea and HIV are able to pass both diseases more readily to their partners.
Complications in babies. Babies who contract gonorrhea from their mothers during birth can develop blindness, sores on the scalp and infections.
The signs and symptoms of gout almost always occur suddenly, and often at night. They include:
Intense joint pain. Gout usually affects the large joint of your big toe, but it can occur in any joint. Other commonly affected joints include the ankles, knees, elbows, wrists and fingers. The pain is likely to be most severe within the first four to 12 hours after it begins.
Lingering discomfort. After the most severe pain subsides, some joint discomfort may last from a few days to a few weeks. Later attacks are likely to last longer and affect more joints.
Inflammation and redness. The affected joint or joints become swollen, tender, warm and red.
Limited range of motion. As gout progresses, you may not be able to move your joints normally.
If you experience sudden, intense pain in a joint, call your doctor. Gout that goes untreated can lead to worsening pain and joint damage.
Seek medical care immediately if you have a fever and a joint is hot and inflamed, which can be a sign of infection.
Gout occurs when urate crystals accumulate in your joint, causing the inflammation and intense pain of a gout attack. Urate crystals can form when you have high levels of uric acid in your blood.
Your body produces uric acid when it breaks down purines — substances that are found naturally in your body.
Purines are also found in certain foods, such as steak, organ meats and seafood. Other foods also promote higher levels of uric acid, such as alcoholic beverages, especially beer, and drinks sweetened with fruit sugar (fructose).
Normally, uric acid dissolves in your blood and passes through your kidneys into your urine. But sometimes either your body produces too much uric acid or your kidneys excrete too little uric acid. When this happens, uric acid can build up, forming sharp, needlelike urate crystals in a joint or surrounding tissue that cause pain, inflammation and swelling.
You're more likely to develop gout if you have high levels of uric acid in your body. Factors that increase the uric acid level in your body include:
Diet. Eating a diet rich in meat and seafood and drinking beverages sweetened with fruit sugar (fructose) increase levels of uric acid, which increase your risk of gout. Alcohol consumption, especially of beer, also increases the risk of gout.
Obesity. If you're overweight, your body produces more uric acid and your kidneys have a more difficult time eliminating uric acid.
Medical conditions. Certain diseases and conditions increase your risk of gout. These include untreated high blood pressure and chronic conditions such as diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and heart and kidney diseases.
Certain medications. The use of thiazide diuretics — commonly used to treat hypertension — and low-dose aspirin also can increase uric acid levels. So can the use of anti-rejection drugs prescribed for people who have undergone an organ transplant.
Family history of gout. If other members of your family have had gout, you're more likely to develop the disease.
Age and sex. Gout occurs more often in men, primarily because women tend to have lower uric acid levels. After menopause, however, women's uric acid levels approach those of men. Men are also more likely to develop gout earlier — usually between the ages of 30 and 50 — whereas women generally develop signs and symptoms after menopause.
Recent surgery or trauma. Experiencing recent surgery or trauma has been associated with an increased risk of developing a gout attack.
People with gout can develop more-severe conditions, such as:
Recurrent gout. Some people may never experience gout signs and symptoms again. Others may experience gout several times each year. Medications may help prevent gout attacks in people with recurrent gout. If left untreated, gout can cause erosion and destruction of a joint.
Advanced gout. Untreated gout may cause deposits of urate crystals to form under the skin in nodules called tophi (TOE-fie). Tophi can develop in several areas such as your fingers, hands, feet, elbows or Achilles tendons along the backs of your ankles. Tophi usually aren't painful, but they can become swollen and tender during gout attacks.
Kidney stones. Urate crystals may collect in the urinary tract of people with gout, causing kidney stones. Medications can help reduce the risk of kidney stones.
Grand mal seizures have two stages:
Tonic phase. Loss of consciousness occurs, and the muscles suddenly contract and cause the person to fall down. This phase tends to last about 10 to 20 seconds.
Clonic phase. The muscles go into rhythmic contractions, alternately flexing and relaxing. Convulsions usually last one to two minutes or less.
The following signs and symptoms occur in some but not all people with grand mal seizures:
A scream. Some people may cry out at the beginning of a seizure.
Loss of bowel and bladder control. This may happen during or following a seizure.
Unresponsiveness after convulsions. Unconsciousness may persist for several minutes after the convulsion has ended.
Confusion. A period of disorientation often follows a grand mal seizure. This is referred to as postictal confusion.
Fatigue. Sleepiness is common after a grand mal seizure.
Severe headache. Headaches may occur after a grand mal seizure.
Seek immediate medical help if any of the following occurs: The seizure lasts more than five minutes, Breathing or consciousness doesn't return after the seizure stops, A second seizure follows immediately, You have a high fever, You're experiencing heat exhaustion., You're pregnant., You have diabetes., You've injured yourself during the seizure..
If you experience a seizure for the first time, seek medical advice.
Additionally, seek medical advice for yourself or your child: If the number of seizures experienced increases significantly without explanation, If new seizure signs or symptoms appear.
Grand mal seizures occur when the electrical activity over the whole surface of the brain becomes abnormally synchronized. The brain's nerve cells normally communicate with each other by sending electrical and chemical signals across the synapses that connect the cells.
In people who have seizures, the brain's usual electrical activity is altered and many nerve cells fire at the same time. Exactly what causes the changes to occur often remains unknown.
However, grand mal seizures are sometimes caused by underlying health problems, such as: Traumatic head injuries, Infections, such as encephalitis or meningitis, or a history of such infections, Injury due to a previous lack of oxygen, Stroke.
Blood vessel malformations in the brain, Genetic syndromes, Brain tumors.
Very low blood levels of glucose, sodium, calcium or magnesium.
Using or withdrawing from drugs, including alcohol.
Risk factors for grand mal seizures include: A family history of seizure disorders, Any injury to the brain from trauma, a stroke, previous infection and other causes, Sleep deprivation, Medical problems that affect electrolyte balance, Illicit drug use, Heavy alcohol use.
Having a seizure at certain times can lead to circumstances that are dangerous for you or others. You might be at risk of:
Falling. If you fall during a seizure, you can injure your head or break a bone.
Drowning. If you have a seizure while swimming or bathing, you're at risk of accidental drowning.
Car accidents. A seizure that causes either loss of awareness or control can be dangerous if you're driving a car or operating other equipment.
Pregnancy complications. Seizures during pregnancy pose dangers to both mother and baby, and certain anti-epileptic medications increase the risk of birth defects. If you have epilepsy and plan to become pregnant, work with your doctor so that he or she can adjust your medications and monitor your pregnancy, as needed.
Emotional health issues. People with seizures are more likely to have psychological problems, such as depression and anxiety. Problems may be a result of difficulties dealing with the condition itself as well as medication side effects.
The signs and symptoms of granuloma annulare can vary, depending on the variety:
Localized. This is the most common type of granuloma annulare. The bump (lesion) borders are circular or semicircular, with a diameter up to 2 inches (5 centimeters). The reddish or skin-colored bumps occur most commonly on the hands, feet, wrists and ankles of young adults.
Generalized. Less commonly, adults experience this type, which causes itchy, reddish or skin-colored bumps on most of the body, including the trunk, arms and legs.
Under the skin. A type that usually affects young children is called subcutaneous granuloma annulare. It produces small, firm lumps under the skin, instead of a rash. The lumps form on the hands, shins and scalp.
Call your doctor if your skin develops reddish bumps (lesions) in ring patterns that don't go away within a few weeks.
It's not clear what causes granuloma annulare. Sometimes it's triggered by: Animal or insect bites, Infections, such as hepatitis, Tuberculin skin tests, Vaccinations, Sun exposure, Minor skin injuries, Drugs.
Granuloma annulare is not contagious.
Granuloma annulare is occasionally associated with diabetes or thyroid disease, most often when lesions are numerous or widespread. It may, rarely, be related to cancer, especially in older people whose granuloma annulare is severe, doesn't respond to treatment or returns after cancer treatment.
Signs and symptoms of granulomatosis with polyangiitis can develop suddenly or over several months. The first warning signs usually involve your sinuses, throat or lungs. The condition often worsens rapidly, affecting blood vessels and the organs they supply, such as the kidneys.
Signs and symptoms of granulomatosis with polyangiitis might include: Pus-like drainage with crusts from your nose, stuffiness, sinus infections and nosebleeds, Coughing, sometimes with bloody phlegm, Shortness of breath or wheezing, Fever, Fatigue, Joint pain, Numbness in your limbs, fingers or toes, Weight loss, Blood in your urine, Skin sores, bruising or rashes, Eye redness, burning or pain, and vision problems, Ear inflammation and hearing problems.
For some people, the disease affects only the lungs. When the kidneys are affected, blood and urine tests can detect the problem. Without treatment, kidney or lung failure can occur.
See your doctor if you have a runny nose that doesn't respond to over-the-counter cold medicines, especially if it's accompanied by nosebleeds and pus-like material, coughing up blood, or other warning signs of granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Because this disease can worsen quickly, early diagnosis is key to getting effective treatment.
The cause of granulomatosis with polyangiitis isn't known. It's not contagious, and there's no evidence that it's inherited.
The condition can lead to inflamed, narrowed blood vessels and harmful inflammatory tissue masses (granulomas). Granulomas can destroy normal tissue, and narrowed blood vessels reduce the amount of blood and oxygen that reaches your body's tissues and organs.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis can occur at any age. It most often affects people between the ages of 40 and 65.
Besides affecting your nose, sinuses, throat, lungs and kidneys, granulomatosis with polyangiitis can affect your skin, eyes, ears, heart and other organs. Complications might include: Hearing loss, Skin scarring, Kidney damage, A loss of height in the bridge of the nose (saddling) caused by weakened cartilage, A blood clot forming in one or more deep veins, usually in your leg.
Common signs and symptoms of Graves' disease include: Anxiety and irritability, A fine tremor of the hands or fingers, Heat sensitivity and an increase in perspiration or warm, moist skin, Weight loss, despite normal eating habits, Enlargement of the thyroid gland (goiter), Change in menstrual cycles, Erectile dysfunction or reduced libido, Frequent bowel movements, Bulging eyes (Graves' ophthalmopathy), Fatigue, Thick, red skin usually on the shins or tops of the feet (Graves' dermopathy), Rapid or irregular heartbeat (palpitations), Sleep disturbance.
About 30% of people with Graves' disease show some signs and symptoms of Graves' ophthalmopathy. In Graves' ophthalmopathy, inflammation and other immune system events affect muscles and other tissues around your eyes. Signs and symptoms may include: Bulging eyes, Gritty sensation in the eyes, Pressure or pain in the eyes, Puffy or retracted eyelids, Reddened or inflamed eyes, Light sensitivity, Double vision, Vision loss.
An uncommon manifestation of Graves' disease, called Graves' dermopathy, is the reddening and thickening of the skin, most often on your shins or the tops of your feet.
A number of medical conditions can cause the signs and symptoms associated with Graves' disease. See your doctor if you experience any potential problems related to Graves' disease to get a prompt and accurate diagnosis.
Seek emergency care if you're experiencing heart-related signs and symptoms, such as a rapid or irregular heartbeat, or if you develop vision loss.
Graves' disease is caused by a malfunction in the body's disease-fighting immune system. It's unknown why this happens.
The immune system normally produces antibodies designed to target a specific virus, bacterium or other foreign substance. In Graves' disease — for reasons that aren't well understood — the immune system produces an antibody to one part of the cells in the hormone-producing gland in the neck (thyroid gland).
Normally, thyroid function is regulated by a hormone released by a tiny gland at the base of the brain (pituitary gland). The antibody associated with Graves' disease — thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAb) — acts like the regulatory pituitary hormone. That means that TRAb overrides the normal regulation of the thyroid, causing an overproduction of thyroid hormones (hyperthyroidism).
Graves' ophthalmopathy results from a buildup of certain carbohydrates in the muscles and tissues behind the eyes — the cause of which also isn't known. It appears that the same antibody that can cause thyroid dysfunction may also have an "attraction" to tissues surrounding the eyes.
Graves' ophthalmopathy often appears at the same time as hyperthyroidism or several months later. But signs and symptoms of ophthalmopathy may appear years before or after the onset of hyperthyroidism. Graves' ophthalmopathy can also occur even if there's no hyperthyroidism.
Although anyone can develop Graves' disease, many factors can increase the risk of disease, including:
Family history. Because a family history of Graves' disease is a known risk factor, there is likely a gene or genes that can make a person more susceptible to the disorder.
Sex. Women are much more likely to develop Graves' disease than are men.
Age. Graves' disease usually develops in people before age 40.
Other autoimmune disorders. People with other disorders of the immune system, such as type 1 diabetes or rheumatoid arthritis, have an increased risk.
Emotional or physical stress. Stressful life events or illness may act as a trigger for the onset of Graves' disease among people who have genes that increase their risk.
Pregnancy. Pregnancy or recent childbirth may increase the risk of the disorder, particularly among women who have genes that increase their risk.
Smoking. Cigarette smoking, which can affect the immune system, increases the risk of Graves' disease. Smokers who have Graves' disease are also at increased risk of developing Graves' ophthalmopathy.
Complications of Graves' disease can include:
Pregnancy issues. Possible complications of Graves' disease during pregnancy include miscarriage, preterm birth, fetal thyroid dysfunction, poor fetal growth, maternal heart failure and preeclampsia. Preeclampsia is a maternal condition that results in high blood pressure and other serious signs and symptoms.
Heart disorders. If left untreated, Graves' disease can lead to heart rhythm disorders, changes in the structure and function of the heart muscles, and the inability of the heart to pump enough blood to the body (heart failure).
Thyroid storm. A rare but life-threatening complication of Graves' disease is thyroid storm, also known as accelerated hyperthyroidism or thyrotoxic crisis. It's more likely when severe hyperthyroidism is untreated or treated inadequately.
The sudden and drastic increase in thyroid hormones can produce many effects, including fever, sweating, vomiting, diarrhea, delirium, severe weakness, seizures, irregular heartbeat, yellow skin and eyes (jaundice), severe low blood pressure, and coma. Thyroid storm requires immediate emergency care.
Brittle bones. Untreated hyperthyroidism also can lead to weak, brittle bones (osteoporosis). The strength of your bones depends, in part, on the amount of calcium and other minerals they contain. Too much thyroid hormone interferes with your body's ability to incorporate calcium into your bones.
Signs and symptoms will vary, depending on the severity of the greenstick fracture. Mild fractures might be mistaken for sprains or bruises. More-severe greenstick fractures may cause an obvious deformity, accompanied by significant pain and swelling.
Contact your doctor if your child has persistent pain in an injured limb. Seek immediate medical attention if a child is unable to bear weight or if there is obvious pain, deformity and swelling.
Childhood fractures most commonly occur with a fall. Arm fractures are more common than leg fractures, since the common reaction is to throw out your arms to catch yourself when you fall.
The risk of greenstick fractures is higher in young children because their bones are softer and more flexible than adult bones. In a greenstick fracture, the bone bends and cracks instead of breaking into separate pieces. Most greenstick fractures occur in children under age 10.
Most babies born to women carrying group B strep are healthy. But the few who are infected by group B strep during labor can become critically ill.
In infants, illness caused by group B strep can be within six hours of birth (early onset) — or weeks or months after birth (late onset).
Signs and symptoms might include: Fever, Difficulty feeding, Sluggishness and a lack of energy (lethargy), Difficulty breathing, Irritability, Jaundice.
Many adults carry group B strep in their bodies, usually in the bowel, vagina, rectum, bladder or throat, and have no signs or symptoms.
In some cases, however, group B strep can cause a urinary tract infection or more-serious infections such as blood infections (bacteremia) or pneumonia.
If you have signs or symptoms of group B strep infection — particularly if you're pregnant, you have a chronic medical condition or you're older than 65 — contact your doctor right away.
If you notice your infant has signs or symptoms of group B strep disease, contact your baby's doctor immediately.
Many healthy people carry group B strep bacteria in their bodies. You might carry the bacteria in your body for a short time — it can come and go — or you might always have it. Group B strep bacteria aren't sexually transmitted, and they're not spread through food or water. How the bacteria are spread to anyone other than newborns isn't known.
Group B strep can spread to a baby during a vaginal delivery if the baby is exposed to — or swallows — fluids containing group B strep.
An infant is at increased risk of developing group B strep disease if: The mother carries group B strep in her body, The baby is born prematurely (earlier than 37 weeks), The mother's water breaks 18 hours or more before delivery, The mother has an infection of the placental tissues and amniotic fluid (chorioamnionitis), The mother has a urinary tract infection during the pregnancy, The mother's temperature is greater than 100.4 F (38 C) during labor, The mother previously delivered an infant with group B strep disease.
You're at increased risk of a group B strep infection if: You have a medical condition that impairs your immune system, such as diabetes, HIV infection, cancer or liver disease, You're older than 65.
Group B strep infection can lead to life-threatening complications in infants, including: Pneumonia, Inflammation of the membranes and fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis), Infection in the bloodstream (bacteremia).
If you're pregnant, group B strep can cause infection in the following areas: Urinary tract, Placenta and amniotic fluid, Membrane lining the uterus, Bloodstream.
If you're an older adult or you have a chronic health condition, group B strep bacteria can cause complications such as: Skin infection, Infection of the bloodstream, Urinary tract infection, Pneumonia, Bone and joint infections, Infection of the heart valves (endocarditis), Inflammation of the membranes and fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis).
Growing pains usually cause an aching or throbbing feeling in the legs. This pain often occurs in the front of the thighs, the calves or behind the knees. Usually both legs hurt. Some children may also experience abdominal pain or headaches during episodes of growing pains. The pain doesn't occur every day. It comes and goes.
Growing pains often strike in the late afternoon or early evening and disappear by morning. Sometimes the pain awakens a child in the middle of the night.
Consult your child's doctor if you're concerned about your child's leg pain or the pain is: Persistent, Still present in the morning, Severe enough to interfere with your child's normal activities, Located in the joints, Associated with an injury, Accompanied by other signs or symptoms, such as swelling, redness, tenderness, fever, limping, rash, loss of appetite, weakness or fatigue.
The cause of growing pains is unknown. But there's no evidence that a child's growth is painful.
Growing pains don't usually happen where growth is occurring or during times of rapid growth. It's been suggested that growing pains may be linked to restless legs syndrome. But muscle pain at night from overuse during the day is thought to be the most likely cause of growing pains. Overuse from activities such as running, climbing and jumping can be hard on a child's musculoskeletal system.
Growing pains are common in preschool and school-age children. They're slightly more common in girls than in boys. Running, climbing or jumping during the day might increase the risk of leg pain at night.
Most growth plate fractures occur in bones of the fingers, forearm and lower leg. Signs and symptoms of a growth plate fracture may include: Pain and tenderness, particularly in response to pressure on the growth plate, Inability to move the affected area or to put weight or pressure on the limb, Warmth and swelling at the end of a bone, near a joint.
If you suspect a fracture, take your child to be examined by a doctor. Also have your child evaluated if you notice a visible deformity in your child's arms or legs, or if your child is having trouble playing sports because of persistent pain.
Growth plate fractures often are caused by a fall or a blow to the limb, as might occur in: A car accident, Competitive sports, such as football, basketball, running, dancing or gymnastics, Recreational activities, such as biking, sledding, skiing or skateboarding.
Growth plate fractures can occasionally be caused by overuse, which can occur during sports training or repetitive throwing.
Growth plate fractures occur twice as often in boys as in girls, because girls finish growing earlier than do boys. By the age of 12, most girls' growth plates have already matured and been replaced with solid bone.
Most growth plate fractures heal with no complications. But the following factors can increase the risk of crooked, accelerated or stunted bone growth.
Severity of the injury. If the growth plate has been shifted, shattered or crushed, the risk of limb deformity is greater.
Age of the child. Younger children have more years of growth ahead of them, so if the growth plate is permanently damaged, there is more chance of deformity developing. If a child is almost done growing, permanent damage to the growth plate may cause only minimal deformity.
Location of the injury. The growth plates around the knee are more sensitive to injury. A growth plate fracture at the knee can cause the leg to be shorter, longer or crooked if the growth plate has permanent damage. Growth plate injuries around the wrist and shoulder usually heal without problems.
Guillain-Barre syndrome often begins with tingling and weakness starting in your feet and legs and spreading to your upper body and arms. In about 10% of people with the disorder, symptoms begin in the arms or face. As Guillain-Barre syndrome progresses, muscle weakness can evolve into paralysis.
Signs and symptoms of Guillain-Barre syndrome may include: Prickling, pins and needles sensations in your fingers, toes, ankles or wrists, Weakness in your legs that spreads to your upper body, Unsteady walking or inability to walk or climb stairs, Difficulty with facial movements, including speaking, chewing or swallowing, Double vision or inability to move eyes, Severe pain that may feel achy, shooting or cramplike and may be worse at night, Difficulty with bladder control or bowel function, Rapid heart rate, Low or high blood pressure, Difficulty breathing.
People with Guillain-Barre syndrome usually experience their most significant weakness within two weeks after symptoms begin.
Once thought to be a single disorder, Guillain-Barre syndrome is now known to occur in several forms. The main types are:
Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (AIDP), the most common form in North America and Europe. The most common sign of AIDP is muscle weakness that starts in the lower part of your body and spreads upward.
Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS), in which paralysis starts in the eyes. MFS is also associated with unsteady gait. MFS is less common in the U.S. but more common in Asia.
Acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN) and acute motor-sensory axonal neuropathy (AMSAN) are less common in the U.S. But AMAN and AMSAN are more frequent in China, Japan and Mexico.
Call your doctor if you have mild tingling in your toes or fingers that doesn't seem to be spreading or getting worse. Seek emergency medical help if you have any of these severe signs or symptoms: Tingling that started in your feet or toes and is now moving up your body, Tingling or weakness that's spreading rapidly, Difficulty catching your breath or shortness of breath when lying flat, Choking on saliva.
Guillain-Barre syndrome is a serious condition that requires immediate hospitalization because it can worsen rapidly. The sooner appropriate treatment is started, the better the chance of a good outcome.
The exact cause of Guillain-Barre syndrome isn't known. The disorder usually appears days or weeks after a respiratory or digestive tract infection. Rarely, recent surgery or vaccination can trigger Guillain-Barre syndrome. Recently, there have been cases reported following infection with the Zika virus. Guillain-Barre syndrome may also occur after COVID-19 infection.
In Guillain-Barre syndrome, your immune system — which usually attacks only invading organisms — begins attacking the nerves. In AIDP, the most common form of Guillain-Barre syndrome in the U.S., the nerves' protective covering (myelin sheath) is damaged. The damage prevents nerves from transmitting signals to your brain, causing weakness, numbness or paralysis.
Guillain-Barre syndrome can affect all age groups. But your risk increases as you age. It's also more common in males than females.
Guillain-Barre syndrome may be triggered by: Most commonly, infection with campylobacter, a type of bacteria often found in undercooked poultry, Influenza virus, Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, Zika virus, Hepatitis A, B, C and E, HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, Mycoplasma pneumonia, Surgery, Trauma, Hodgkin's lymphoma, Rarely, influenza vaccinations or childhood vaccinations, COVID-19 infection.
Guillain-Barre syndrome affects your nerves. Because nerves control your movements and body functions, people with Guillain-Barre may experience:
Breathing difficulties. The weakness or paralysis can spread to the muscles that control your breathing, a potentially fatal complication. Up to 22% of people with Guillain-Barre syndrome need temporary help from a machine to breathe within the first week when they're hospitalized for treatment.
Residual numbness or other sensations. Most people with Guillain-Barre syndrome recover completely or have only minor, residual weakness, numbness or tingling.
Heart and blood pressure problems. Blood pressure fluctuations and irregular heart rhythms (cardiac arrhythmias) are common side effects of Guillain-Barre syndrome.
Pain. One-third of people with Guillain-Barre syndrome experience severe nerve pain, which may be eased with medication.
Bowel and bladder function problems. Sluggish bowel function and urine retention may result from Guillain-Barre syndrome.
Blood clots. People who are immobile due to Guillain-Barre syndrome are at risk of developing blood clots. Until you're able to walk independently, taking blood thinners and wearing support stockings may be recommended.
Pressure sores. Being immobile also puts you at risk of developing bedsores (pressure sores). Frequent repositioning may help avoid this problem.
Relapse. From 2% to 5% of people with Guillain-Barre syndrome experience a relapse.
Severe, early symptoms of Guillain-Barre syndrome significantly increase the risk of serious long-term complications. Rarely, death may occur from complications such as respiratory distress syndrome and heart attacks.
The signs and symptoms of H1N1 flu are similar to those of infections caused by other flu strains and can include: Fever, but not always, Chills, Cough, Sore throat, Runny or stuffy nose, Watery, red eyes, Body aches, Headache, Fatigue, Diarrhea, Nausea and vomiting.
Flu symptoms develop about one to three days after you're exposed to the virus.
It's not necessary to see a doctor if you're generally healthy and develop flu signs and symptoms, such as fever, cough and body aches. Call your doctor, however, if you have flu symptoms and you're pregnant or you have a chronic disease, such as asthma, emphysema, diabetes or a heart condition, because you have a higher risk of complications from the flu.
Influenza viruses such as H1N1 infect the cells that line your nose, throat and lungs. The virus enters your body when you inhale contaminated droplets or transfer live virus from a contaminated surface to your eyes, nose or mouth.
You can't catch swine flu from eating pork.
If you live in or travel to an area where many people are infected with H1N1, you may be exposed to the virus.
Swine farmers and veterinarians have the highest risk of exposure to true swine flu because they work with and are near pigs.
Influenza complications include: Worsening of chronic conditions, such as heart disease and asthma, Pneumonia, Neurological signs and symptoms, ranging from confusion to seizures, Respiratory failure.
Hair loss can appear in many different ways, depending on what's causing it. It can come on suddenly or gradually and affect just your scalp or your whole body.
Signs and symptoms of hair loss may include:
Gradual thinning on top of head. This is the most common type of hair loss, affecting people as they age. In men, hair often begins to recede at the hairline on the forehead. Women typically have a broadening of the part in their hair. An increasingly common hair loss pattern in older women is a receding hairline (frontal fibrosing alopecia).
Circular or patchy bald spots. Some people lose hair in circular or patchy bald spots on the scalp, beard or eyebrows. Your skin may become itchy or painful before the hair falls out.
Sudden loosening of hair. A physical or emotional shock can cause hair to loosen. Handfuls of hair may come out when combing or washing your hair or even after gentle tugging. This type of hair loss usually causes overall hair thinning but is temporary.
Full-body hair loss. Some conditions and medical treatments, such as chemotherapy for cancer, can result in the loss of hair all over your body. The hair usually grows back.
Patches of scaling that spread over the scalp. This is a sign of ringworm. It may be accompanied by broken hair, redness, swelling and, at times, oozing.
See your doctor if you are distressed by persistent hair loss in you or your child and want to pursue treatment. For women who are experiencing a receding hairline (frontal fibrosing alopecia), talk with your doctor about early treatment to avoid significant permanent baldness.
Also talk to your doctor if you notice sudden or patchy hair loss or more than usual hair loss when combing or washing your or your child's hair. Sudden hair loss can signal an underlying medical condition that requires treatment.
People typically lose 50 to 100 hairs a day. This usually isn't noticeable because new hair is growing in at the same time. Hair loss occurs when new hair doesn't replace the hair that has fallen out.
Hair loss is typically related to one or more of the following factors:
Family history (heredity). The most common cause of hair loss is a hereditary condition that happens with aging. This condition is called androgenic alopecia, male-pattern baldness and female-pattern baldness. It usually occurs gradually and in predictable patterns — a receding hairline and bald spots in men and thinning hair along the crown of the scalp in women.
Hormonal changes and medical conditions. A variety of conditions can cause permanent or temporary hair loss, including hormonal changes due to pregnancy, childbirth, menopause and thyroid problems. Medical conditions include alopecia areata (al-o-PEE-she-uh ar-e-A-tuh), which is immune system related and causes patchy hair loss, scalp infections such as ringworm, and a hair-pulling disorder called trichotillomania (trik-o-til-o-MAY-nee-uh).
Medications and supplements. Hair loss can be a side effect of certain drugs, such as those used for cancer, arthritis, depression, heart problems, gout and high blood pressure.
Radiation therapy to the head. The hair may not grow back the same as it was before.
A very stressful event. Many people experience a general thinning of hair several months after a physical or emotional shock. This type of hair loss is temporary.
Hairstyles and treatments. Excessive hairstyling or hairstyles that pull your hair tight, such as pigtails or cornrows, can cause a type of hair loss called traction alopecia. Hot-oil hair treatments and permanents also can cause hair to fall out. If scarring occurs, hair loss could be permanent.
A number of factors can increase your risk of hair loss, including: A family history of balding on your mother's or father's side, Age, Significant weight loss, Certain medical conditions, such as diabetes and lupus, Stress, Poor nutrition.
Some people have no signs or symptoms of hairy cell leukemia, but a blood test for another disease or condition may inadvertently reveal hairy cell leukemia.
Other times people with hairy cell leukemia experience signs and symptoms common to a number of diseases and conditions, such as: A feeling of fullness in your abdomen that may make it uncomfortable to eat more than a little at a time, Fatigue, Easy bruising, Recurring infections, Weakness, Weight loss.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes hairy cell leukemia.
Doctors know that cancer occurs when cells develop errors (mutations) in their DNA. In the case of hairy cell leukemia, mutations in the DNA cause your bone marrow stem cells to create too many white blood cells that don't work properly. Doctors don't know what causes the DNA mutations that lead to hairy cell leukemia.
Certain factors may increase your risk of developing hairy cell leukemia. Not all research studies agree on what factors increase your risk of the disease.
Some research indicates that your risk of hairy cell leukemia increases based on your:
Exposure to radiation. People exposed to radiation, such as those who work around X-ray machines and do not wear adequate protective equipment or those who received radiation treatment for cancer, may have a higher risk of developing hairy cell leukemia, but the evidence is inconclusive.
Exposure to chemicals. There are conflicting studies on the role of industrial and agricultural chemicals in hairy cell leukemia development.
Hairy cell leukemia progresses very slowly and sometimes remains stable for many years. For this reason, few complications of the disease occur.
Untreated hairy cell leukemia that progresses may crowd out healthy blood cells in the bone marrow, leading to serious complications, such as:
Infections. Reduced numbers of healthy white blood cells put you at risk of infections that your body might otherwise fight off.
Bleeding. Low platelet counts make it hard for your body to stop bleeding once it starts. If you have a mildly low platelet count, you might notice that you bruise more easily. Very low platelet counts can cause spontaneous bleeding from the nose or gums.
Anemia. A low red blood cell count means fewer cells are available to carry oxygen throughout your body. This is called anemia. Anemia causes fatigue.
Some studies have found that people with hairy cell leukemia may have an increased risk of developing a second type of cancer. It isn't clear whether this risk is due to hairy cell leukemia's effect on the body or if the risk comes from the medications used to treat hairy cell leukemia.
Second cancers found in people treated for hairy cell leukemia include non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, among others.
Hammertoe and mallet toe feature an abnormal bend in the joints of one or more of your toes. Moving the affected toe may be difficult or painful. Corns and calluses can result from the toe rubbing against the inside of your shoes.
Hammertoe and mallet toe have been linked to:
Certain shoes. High-heeled shoes or footwear that's too tight in the toe box can crowd your toes into a space in which they can't lie flat. This curled toe position might eventually persist even when you're barefoot.
Trauma. An injury in which you stub, jam or break a toe can make it more likely for that digit to develop hammertoe or mallet toe.
Abnormal balance of the toe muscles. The imbalance leads to instability, which can cause the toe to contract.
Factors that can increase you risk of hammertoe and mallet toe include:
Age. The risk of hammertoe and mallet toe increases with age.
Sex. Women are much more likely to develop hammertoe or mallet toe than are men.
Toe length. If your second toe is longer than your big toe, it's at higher risk of hammertoe or mallet toe.
Certain diseases. Arthritis and diabetes might make you more prone to developing foot deformities. Heredity might also play a role.
At first, a hammertoe or mallet toe might maintain its flexibility. But eventually, the tendons of the toe can contract and tighten, causing your toe to become permanently bent. Your shoes can rub against the raised portion of the toe or toes, causing painful corns or calluses.
A hamstring injury typically causes a sudden, sharp pain in the back of your thigh. You might also feel a "popping" or tearing sensation. Swelling and tenderness usually develop within a few hours. You may also experience bruising or discoloration along the back of your leg, as well as muscle weakness or an inability to put weight on your injured leg.
Mild hamstring strains can be treated at home. But you should see a doctor if you can't bear any weight on your injured leg or if you can't walk more than four steps without significant pain.
The hamstring muscles are a group of three muscles that run along the back of your thigh from your hip to just below your knee. These muscles make it possible to extend your leg straight behind your body and to bend your knee. When any one of these muscles stretches beyond its limit during physical activity, injury can result.
Hamstring injury risk factors include:
Sports participation. Sports that require sprinting or running, or other activities such as dancing that might require extreme stretching, make a hamstring injury more likely.
Prior hamstring injury. After you've had one hamstring injury, you're more likely to have another one, especially if you try to resume all your activities at pre-injury levels of intensity before your muscles have time to heal and rebuild strength.
Poor flexibility. If you have poor flexibility, your muscles may not be able to bear the full force of the action required during certain activities.
Muscle imbalance. Although not all experts agree, some suggest that a muscle imbalance may lead to hamstring injury. When the muscles along the front of your thigh — the quadriceps — become stronger and more developed than your hamstring muscles, you may be more likely to injure your hamstring muscles.
Returning to strenuous activities before your hamstring muscles are completely healed might cause an injury recurrence.
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease may cause all of the following signs and symptoms or just some of them. They include: Fever, Sore throat, Feeling unwell, Painful, red, blister-like lesions on the tongue, gums and inside of the cheeks, A red rash, without itching but sometimes with blistering, on the palms, soles and sometimes the buttocks, Irritability in infants and toddlers, Loss of appetite.
The usual period from initial infection to the onset of signs and symptoms (incubation period) is three to six days. A fever is often the first sign of hand-foot-and-mouth disease, followed by a sore throat and sometimes a poor appetite and feeling unwell.
One or two days after the fever begins, painful sores may develop in the front of the mouth or throat. A rash on the hands and feet and possibly on the buttocks can follow within one or two days.
Sores that develop in the back of the mouth and throat may suggest that your child is infected with a related viral illness called herpangina. Other features of herpangina include a sudden high fever and in some instances, seizure. Sores that develop on the hands, feet or other parts of the body are very rare.
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease is usually a minor illness causing only a few days of fever and relatively mild signs and symptoms. Contact your doctor if mouth sores or a sore throat keep your child from drinking fluids. And contact your doctor if after a few days, your child's signs and symptoms worsen.
The most common cause of hand-foot-and-mouth disease is infection with the coxsackievirus A16. The coxsackievirus belongs to a group of viruses called nonpolio enteroviruses. Other types of enteroviruses sometimes cause hand-foot-and-mouth disease.
Oral ingestion is the main source of coxsackievirus infection and hand-foot-and-mouth disease. The illness spreads by person-to-person contact with an infected person's: Nasal secretions or throat discharge, Saliva, Fluid from blisters, Stool, Respiratory droplets sprayed into the air after a cough or sneeze.
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease is most common in children in child care settings because of frequent diaper changes and toilet training, and because little children often put their hands in their mouths.
Although your child is most contagious with hand-foot-and-mouth disease during the first week of the illness, the virus can remain in his or her body for weeks after the signs and symptoms are gone. That means your child still can infect others.
Some people, especially adults, can pass the virus without showing any signs or symptoms of the disease.
Outbreaks of the disease are more common in summer and autumn in the United States and other temperate climates. In tropical climates, outbreaks occur year-round.
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease isn't related to foot-and-mouth disease (sometimes called hoof-and-mouth disease), which is an infectious viral disease found in farm animals. You can't contract hand-foot-and-mouth disease from pets or other animals, and you can't transmit it to them.
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease primarily affects children younger than age 10, often those under 5 years. Children in child care centers are especially susceptible to outbreaks of hand-foot-and-mouth disease because the infection spreads by person-to-person contact, and young children are the most susceptible.
Children usually develop immunity to hand-foot-and-mouth disease as they get older by building antibodies after exposure to the virus that causes the disease. However, it's possible for adolescents and adults to get the disease.
The most common complication of hand-foot-and-mouth disease is dehydration. The illness can cause sores in the mouth and throat, making swallowing painful and difficult.
Watch closely to make sure your child frequently sips fluid during the course of the illness. If dehydration is severe, intravenous (IV) fluids may be necessary.
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease is usually a minor illness causing only a few days of fever and relatively mild signs and symptoms. A rare and sometimes serious form of the coxsackievirus can involve the brain and cause other complications:
Viral meningitis. This is a rare infection and inflammation of the membranes (meninges) and cerebrospinal fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord.
Encephalitis. This severe and potentially life-threatening disease involves brain inflammation caused by a virus. Encephalitis is rare.
Hangover symptoms typically begin when your blood alcohol content drops significantly and is at or near zero. They're usually in full effect the morning after a night of heavy drinking. Depending on what and how much you drank, you may notice: Fatigue and weakness, Excessive thirst and dry mouth, Headaches and muscle aches, Nausea, vomiting or stomach pain, Poor or decreased sleep, Increased sensitivity to light and sound, Dizziness or a sense of the room spinning, Shakiness, Decreased ability to concentrate, Mood disturbances, such as depression, anxiety and irritability, Rapid heartbeat.
Hangovers after a single night's drinking go away on their own. Talk with your doctor if you're concerned that frequent, heavy drinking may lead to serious alcohol withdrawal, or when regular hangovers affect your quality of life, including your personal relationships or your performance at work. Treatment for alcohol problems is widely available.
More-severe signs and symptoms that accompany heavy drinking may indicate alcohol poisoning — a life-threatening emergency. Call 911 or your local emergency number if a person who has been drinking shows signs of: Confusion, Vomiting, Seizures, Slow breathing (less than eight breaths a minute), Irregular breathing (a gap of more than 10 seconds between breaths), Blue-tinged skin or pale skin, Low body temperature (hypothermia), Difficulty remaining conscious, Passing out (unconsciousness) and can't be awakened.
A person who is unconscious or can't be awakened is at risk of dying. If you suspect that someone has alcohol poisoning — even if you don't see the classic signs and symptoms — seek immediate medical care.
Hangovers are caused by drinking too much alcohol. A single alcoholic drink is enough to trigger a hangover for some people, while others may drink heavily and escape a hangover entirely.
Various factors may contribute to a hangover. For example:
Alcohol causes your body to produce more urine. In turn, urinating more than usual can lead to dehydration — often indicated by thirst, dizziness and lightheadedness.
Alcohol triggers an inflammatory response from your immune system. Your immune system may trigger certain agents that commonly produce physical symptoms, such as an inability to concentrate, memory problems, decreased appetite and loss of interest in usual activities.
Alcohol irritates the lining of your stomach. Alcohol increases the production of stomach acid and delays stomach emptying. Any of these factors can cause abdominal pain, nausea or vomiting.
Alcohol can cause your blood sugar to fall. If your blood sugar dips too low, you may experience fatigue, weakness, shakiness, mood disturbances and even seizures.
Alcohol causes your blood vessels to expand, which can lead to headaches.
Alcohol can make you sleepy, but it prevents deeper stages of sleep and often causes awakening in the middle of the night. This may leave you groggy and tired.
Alcoholic beverages contain ingredients called congeners, which give many types of alcoholic beverages their flavor and can contribute to hangovers. Congeners are found in larger amounts in dark liquors, such as brandy and bourbon, than in clear liquors, such as vodka and gin.
Congeners are more likely to produce a hangover or increase the severity of a hangover. But drinking too much alcohol of any color can still make you feel bad the next morning.
Anyone who drinks alcohol can experience a hangover, but some people are more susceptible to hangovers than others are. A genetic variation that affects the way alcohol is metabolized may make some people flush, sweat or become ill after drinking even a small amount of alcohol.
Factors that may make a hangover more likely or severe include:
Drinking on an empty stomach. Having no food in your stomach speeds the body's absorption of alcohol.
Using other drugs, such as nicotine, along with alcohol. Smoking combined with drinking appears to increase the likelihood of next-day misery.
Not sleeping well or long enough after drinking. Some researchers believe that some hangover symptoms are often due, at least in part, to the poor-quality and short sleep cycle that typically follows a night of drinking.
Having a family history of alcoholism. Having close relatives with a history of alcoholism may suggest an inherited problem with the way your body processes alcohol.
Drinking darker colored alcoholic beverages. Darker colored drinks often contain a high volume of congeners and may be more likely to produce a hangover.
When you have a hangover, you're likely to experience problems with: Memory, Concentration, Dexterity.
Not surprisingly, this temporary dulling of your abilities increases your risk of a number of problems at school or work, such as: Absenteeism, Trouble completing tasks, Conflict with others, Falling asleep at school or on the job, Workplace injuries.
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome advances through two distinct stages. In the first stage, you may experience flu-like signs and symptoms that may include: Fever and chills, Headaches and muscle aches, Vomiting, diarrhea or abdominal pain.
In its early stages, hantavirus infection is difficult to distinguish from influenza, pneumonia or other viral conditions. After four to 10 days, more-serious signs and symptoms begin. They typically include: A cough that produces secretions, Shortness of breath, Fluid accumulating within the lungs, Low blood pressure, Reduced heart efficiency.
The signs and symptoms of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome can worsen suddenly and may quickly become life-threatening. If you've been around rodents or rodent droppings and have signs and symptoms of fever, chills, muscle aches or any difficulties breathing, seek immediate medical attention.
Each type of hantavirus has a preferred rodent carrier. The deer mouse is the primary carrier of the virus responsible for most cases of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in North America. Other hantavirus carriers include the white-tailed mouse, cotton rat and rice rat.
Hantaviruses are transmitted to people primarily through the aerosolization of viruses shed in infected rodents' droppings, urine or saliva. Aerosolization occurs when a virus is kicked up into the air, making it easy for you to inhale. For example, a broom used to clean up mouse droppings in an attic may nudge into the air tiny particles of feces containing hantaviruses, which you can then easily inhale.
After you inhale hantaviruses, they reach your lungs and begin to invade tiny blood vessels called capillaries, eventually causing them to leak. Your lungs then flood with fluid, which can trigger any of the respiratory problems associated with hantavirus pulmonary syndrome.
People who become infected with the North American strain of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome aren't contagious to other people. However, certain outbreaks in South America have shown evidence of being transmitted from person to person, which illustrates variation across strains in different regions.
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome is most common in rural areas of the western United States during the spring and summer months. Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome also occurs in South America and Canada. Other hantaviruses occur in Asia, where they cause kidney disorders rather than lung problems.
The chance of developing hantavirus pulmonary syndrome is greater for people who work, live or play in spaces where rodents live. Factors and activities that increase the risk include: Opening and cleaning long unused buildings or sheds, Housecleaning, particularly in attics or other low-traffic areas, Having a home or workspace infested with rodents, Having a job that involves exposure to rodents, such as construction, utility work and pest control, Camping, hiking or hunting.
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome can quickly become life-threatening. As the lungs fill with fluid, breathing becomes more and more difficult. Blood pressure drops and organs begin to fail, particularly the heart. Depending on the hantavirus strain, the mortality rate for the North American variety of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome can be more than 30%.
You might not notice signs or symptoms of Hashimoto's disease at first, or you may notice a swelling at the front of your throat (goiter). Hashimoto's disease typically progresses slowly over years and causes chronic thyroid damage, leading to a drop in thyroid hormone levels in your blood. The signs and symptoms are mainly those of an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism).
Signs and symptoms of hypothyroidism include: Fatigue and sluggishness, Increased sensitivity to cold, Constipation, Pale, dry skin, A puffy face, Brittle nails, Hair loss, Enlargement of the tongue, Unexplained weight gain, Muscle aches, tenderness and stiffness, Joint pain and stiffness, Muscle weakness, Excessive or prolonged menstrual bleeding, Depression, Memory lapses.
See your doctor if you develop these signs and symptoms: Tiredness for no apparent reason, Dry skin, Pale, puffy face, Constipation.
You'll also need to see your doctor for periodic testing of your thyroid function if: You've had thyroid surgery, You've had treatment with radioactive iodine or anti-thyroid medications, You've had radiation therapy to your head, neck or upper chest.
If you have high blood cholesterol, talk to your doctor about whether hypothyroidism may be a cause.
And if you're receiving hormone therapy for hypothyroidism caused by Hashimoto's disease, schedule follow-up visits as often as your doctor recommends. It's important to make sure you're receiving the correct dose of medicine. Over time, the dose you need to adequately replace your thyroid function may change.
Hashimoto's disease is an autoimmune disorder in which your immune system creates antibodies that damage your thyroid gland. Doctors don't know what causes your immune system to attack your thyroid gland. Some scientists think a virus or bacterium might trigger the response, while others believe a genetic flaw may be involved.
A combination of factors — including heredity, sex and age — may determine your likelihood of developing the disorder.
These factors may contribute to your risk of developing Hashimoto's disease:
Sex. Women are much more likely to get Hashimoto's disease.
Age. Hashimoto's disease can occur at any age but more commonly occurs during middle age.
Heredity. You're at higher risk for Hashimoto's disease if others in your family have thyroid or other autoimmune diseases.
Other autoimmune disease. Having another autoimmune disease — such as rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes or lupus — increases your risk of developing Hashimoto's disease.
Radiation exposure. People exposed to excessive levels of environmental radiation are more prone to Hashimoto's disease.
Left untreated, an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) caused by Hashimoto's disease can lead to a number of health problems:
Goiter. Constant stimulation of your thyroid to release more hormones may cause the gland to become enlarged, a condition known as a goiter. Hypothyroidism is one of the most common causes of goiters. It's generally not uncomfortable, but a large goiter can affect your appearance and may interfere with swallowing or breathing.
Heart problems. Hashimoto's disease may also be associated with an increased risk of heart disease, primarily because high levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol — the "bad" cholesterol — can occur in people with an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism). If left untreated, hypothyroidism can lead to an enlarged heart and, possibly, heart failure.
Mental health issues. Depression may occur early in Hashimoto's disease and may become more severe over time. Hashimoto's disease can also cause sexual desire (libido) to decrease in both men and women and can lead to slowed mental functioning.
Myxedema (miks-uh-DEE-muh). This rare, life-threatening condition can develop due to long-term severe hypothyroidism as a result of untreated Hashimoto's disease. Its signs and symptoms include drowsiness followed by profound lethargy and unconsciousness.
A myxedema coma may be triggered by exposure to cold, sedatives, infection or other stress on your body. Myxedema requires immediate emergency medical treatment.
Birth defects. Babies born to women with untreated hypothyroidism due to Hashimoto's disease may have a higher risk of birth defects than do babies born to healthy mothers. Doctors have long known that these children are more prone to intellectual and developmental problems. There may be a link between hypothyroid pregnancies and birth defects, such as a cleft palate.
A connection also exists between hypothyroid pregnancies and heart, brain and kidney problems in infants. If you're planning to get pregnant or if you're in early pregnancy, be sure to have your thyroid level checked.
Hay fever signs and symptoms can include: Runny nose and nasal congestion, Watery, itchy, red eyes (allergic conjunctivitis), Sneezing, Cough, Itchy nose, roof of mouth or throat, Swollen, blue-colored skin under the eyes (allergic shiners), Postnasal drip, Fatigue.
Your hay fever signs and symptoms may start or worsen at a particular time of year. Triggers include:
Tree pollen, which is common in early spring.
Grass pollen, which is common in late spring and summer.
Ragweed pollen, which is common in fall.
Dust mites, cockroaches and dander from pets can be bothersome year-round (perennial). Symptoms caused by dander might worsen in winter, when houses are closed up.
Spores from indoor and outdoor fungi and molds are considered both seasonal and perennial.
Signs and symptoms can be similar, so it can be difficult to tell which one you have.
See your doctor if: You can't find relief from your hay fever symptoms, Allergy medications don't provide relief or cause annoying side effects, You have another condition that can worsen hay fever symptoms, such as nasal polyps, asthma or frequent sinus infections.
Many people — especially children — get used to hay fever symptoms, so they might not seek treatment until the symptoms become severe. But getting the right treatment might offer relief.
When you have hay fever, your immune system identifies a harmless airborne substance as harmful. Your immune system then produces antibodies to this harmless substance. The next time you come in contact with the substance, these antibodies signal your immune system to release chemicals such as histamine into your bloodstream, which cause a reaction that leads to the signs and symptoms of hay fever.
The following can increase your risk of developing hay fever: Having other allergies or asthma, Having atopic dermatitis (eczema), Having a blood relative (such as a parent or sibling) with allergies or asthma, Living or working in an environment that constantly exposes you to allergens — such as animal dander or dust mites, Having a mother who smoked during your first year of life.
Problems that may be associated with hay fever include:
Reduced quality of life. Hay fever can interfere with your enjoyment of activities and cause you to be less productive. For many people, hay fever symptoms lead to absences from work or school.
Poor sleep. Hay fever symptoms can keep you awake or make it hard to stay asleep, which can lead to fatigue and a general feeling of being unwell (malaise).
Worsening asthma. Hay fever can worsen signs and symptoms of asthma, such as coughing and wheezing.
Sinusitis. Prolonged sinus congestion due to hay fever may increase your susceptibility to sinusitis — an infection or inflammation of the membrane that lines the sinuses.
Ear infection. In children, hay fever often is a factor in middle ear infection (otitis media).
Common signs and symptoms of a lice infestation can include:
Itching. The most common symptom of a lice infestation is itching on the scalp, neck and ears. This is an allergic reaction to louse bites. When a person has a lice infestation for the first time, itching may not occur for four to six weeks after infestation.
Lice on scalp. Lice may be visible but are difficult to spot because they're small, avoid light and move quickly.
Lice eggs (nits) on hair shafts. Nits stick to hair shafts. Incubating nits may be difficult to see because they're very tiny. They're easiest to spot around the ears and the hairline of the neck. Empty nits may be easier to spot because they're lighter in color and further from the scalp. However, the presence of nits doesn't necessarily indicate an active infestation.
Sores on the scalp, neck and shoulders. Scratching can lead to small, red bumps that may sometimes get infected with bacteria.
See your doctor before you begin treatment if you suspect that you or your child has a head-lice infestation. Studies show that many children have been treated for head lice with over-the-counter medications or home remedies when they don't have an active head-lice infestation.
Things often mistaken for nits include: Dandruff, Residue from hair products, Bead of dead hair tissue on a hair shaft (hair cast), Scabs, dirt or other debris, Other small insects found in the hair.
A head louse is a tan or grayish insect about the size of a strawberry seed. It feeds on human blood from a person's scalp. The female louse produces a sticky substance that firmly attaches each egg to the base of a hair shaft no more than 3/16 inch (5 millimeters) from the scalp.
A louse goes through three stages:
Eggs that hatch after six to nine days.
Nymphs, immature forms of the louse that become mature adults after nine to 12 days.
Adult lice, which can live for three to four weeks. The female louse lays six to 10 eggs a day.
Head lice crawl, but they can't jump or fly. Transmission of a head louse from one person to another is often by direct head-to-head contact, often within a family or among children who have close contact at school or play.
Indirect transmission is uncommon, but lice may spread from one person to another by items such as: Hats and scarves, Brushes and combs, Hair accessories, Headphones, Pillows, towels and upholstery.
Indirect transfer could also occur among items of clothing stored together. For example, hats or scarves hung on the same hook or stored in the same school locker could serve as vehicles for transmitting lice.
Household pets, such as dogs and cats, don't play a role in spreading head lice.
Because head lice are spread primarily by direct head-to-head contact, the risk of transmission is greatest among younger people who play or go to school together. In the United States, cases of head lice most often occur in children in preschool through elementary school.
If your child scratches an itchy scalp from a head-lice infestation, it is possible for the skin to break and develop an infection.
Children get the same types of headaches adults do, but their symptoms may be a little different. For example, migraine pain in adults often lasts at least four hours — but in children, the pain may be much less than that.
Differences in symptoms may make it difficult to pinpoint headache type in a child, especially in a younger child who can't describe symptoms. In general, though, certain symptoms tend to fall more frequently under certain categories.
Migraines can cause: Pulsating, throbbing or pounding head pain, Pain that worsens with exertion, Nausea, Vomiting, Abdominal pain, Extreme sensitivity to light and sound.
Even infants can have migraines. A child who's too young to tell you what's wrong may cry and hold his or her head to indicate severe pain.
Tension-type headaches can cause: A pressing tightness in the muscles of the head or neck, Mild to moderate, nonpulsating pain on both sides of the head, Pain that's not worsened by physical activity, Headache that's not accompanied by nausea or vomiting, as is often the case with migraine.
Younger children may withdraw from regular play and want to sleep more. Tension-type headaches can last from 30 minutes to several days.
Cluster headaches are uncommon in children under 10 years of age. They usually: Occur in groups of five or more episodes, ranging from one headache every other day to eight a day, Involve sharp, stabbing pain on one side of the head that lasts less than three hours, Are accompanied by teariness, congestion, runny nose, or restlessness or agitation.
Doctors use the phrase "chronic daily headache" (CDH) for migraines and tension-type headaches that occur more than 15 days a month. CDH may be caused by an infection, minor head injury or taking pain medications — even nonprescription pain medications — too often.
Most headaches aren't serious, but seek prompt medical care if your child's headaches: Wake your child from sleep, Worsen or become more frequent, Change your child's personality, Follow an injury, such as a blow to the head, Feature persistent vomiting or visual changes, Are accompanied by fever and neck pain or stiffness.
Talk to your child's doctor if you're worried or have questions about your child's headaches.
A number of factors can cause your child to develop headaches. Factors include:
Illness and infection. Common illnesses such as colds, flu, and ear and sinus infections are some of the most frequent causes of headaches in children. Very rarely, meningitis or encephalitis may cause headaches.
Head trauma. Bumps and bruises can cause headaches. Although most head injuries are minor, seek prompt medical attention if your child falls hard on his or her head or gets hit hard in the head. Also, contact a doctor if your child's head pain steadily worsens after a head injury.
Emotional factors. Stress and anxiety — perhaps triggered by problems with peers, teachers or parents — can play a role in children's headaches. Children with depression may complain of headaches, particularly if they have trouble recognizing feelings of sadness and loneliness.
Genetic predisposition. Headaches, particularly migraines, tend to run in families.
Certain foods and beverages. Nitrates — a food preservative found in cured meats, such as bacon, bologna and hot dogs — can trigger headaches, as can the food additive MSG. Also, too much caffeine — contained in soda, chocolates, coffees and teas — can cause headaches.
Problems in the brain. Rarely, a brain tumor or abscess or bleeding in the brain can press on areas of the brain, causing a chronic, worsening headache. Typically in these cases, however, there are other symptoms, such as visual problems, dizziness and lack of coordination.
Any child can develop headaches, but they're more common in: Girls after they reach puberty, Children who have a family history of headaches or migraines, Older teens.
Signs and symptoms of hearing loss may include: Muffling of speech and other sounds, Difficulty understanding words, especially against background noise or in a crowd, Trouble hearing consonants, Frequently asking others to speak more slowly, clearly and loudly, Needing to turn up the volume of the television or radio, Withdrawal from conversations, Avoidance of some social settings.
If you have a sudden loss of hearing, particularly in one ear, seek immediate medical attention.
Talk to your doctor if difficulty hearing is interfering with your daily life. Age-related hearing loss occurs gradually, so you may not notice it at first.
To understand how hearing loss occurs, it can be helpful to first understand how you hear.
Your ear consists of three major areas: outer ear, middle ear and inner ear. Sound waves pass through the outer ear and cause vibrations at the eardrum. The eardrum and three small bones of the middle ear amplify the vibrations as they travel to the inner ear. There, the vibrations pass through fluid in a snail-shaped structure in the inner ear (cochlea).
Attached to nerve cells in the cochlea are thousands of tiny hairs that help translate sound vibrations into electrical signals that are transmitted to your brain. Your brain turns these signals into sound.
Causes of hearing loss include:
Damage to the inner ear. Aging and exposure to loud noise may cause wear and tear on the hairs or nerve cells in the cochlea that send sound signals to the brain. When these hairs or nerve cells are damaged or missing, electrical signals aren't transmitted as efficiently, and hearing loss occurs.
Higher pitched tones may become muffled to you. It may become difficult for you to pick out words against background noise.
Gradual buildup of earwax. Earwax can block the ear canal and prevent conduction of sound waves. Earwax removal can help restore your hearing.
Ear infection and abnormal bone growths or tumors. In the outer or middle ear, any of these can cause hearing loss.
Ruptured eardrum (tympanic membrane perforation). Loud blasts of noise, sudden changes in pressure, poking your eardrum with an object and infection can cause your eardrum to rupture and affect your hearing.
Factors that may damage or lead to loss of the hairs and nerve cells in your inner ear include:
Aging. Degeneration of inner ear structures occurs over time.
Loud noise. Exposure to loud sounds can damage the cells of your inner ear. Damage can occur with long-term exposure to loud noises, or from a short blast of noise, such as from a gunshot.
Heredity. Your genetic makeup may make you more susceptible to ear damage from sound or deterioration from aging.
Occupational noises. Jobs where loud noise is a regular part of the working environment, such as farming, construction or factory work, can lead to damage inside your ear.
Recreational noises. Exposure to explosive noises, such as from firearms and jet engines, can cause immediate, permanent hearing loss. Other recreational activities with dangerously high noise levels include snowmobiling, motorcycling, carpentry or listening to loud music.
Some medications. Drugs such as the antibiotic gentamicin, sildenafil (Viagra) and certain chemotherapy drugs, can damage the inner ear. Temporary effects on your hearing — ringing in the ear (tinnitus) or hearing loss — can occur if you take very high doses of aspirin, other pain relievers, antimalarial drugs or loop diuretics.
Some illnesses. Diseases or illnesses that result in high fever, such as meningitis, may damage the cochlea.
The chart below lists common sounds and their decibel levels. The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) safe noise level is 70 decibels. The louder the noise, the less time it takes to cause permanent hearing damage.
Below are the maximum noise levels on the job to which you may be exposed without hearing protection, and for how long.
Hearing loss can have a significant effect on your quality of life. Older adults with hearing loss may report feelings of depression. Because hearing loss can make conversation difficult, some people experience feelings of isolation. Hearing loss is also associated with cognitive impairment and decline.
The mechanism of interaction between hearing loss, cognitive impairment, depression and isolation is being actively studied. Initial research suggests that treating hearing loss can have a positive effect on cognitive performance, especially memory.
Arrhythmias may not cause any signs or symptoms. In fact, your doctor might find you have an arrhythmia before you do, during a routine examination. Noticeable signs and symptoms don't necessarily mean you have a serious problem, however.
Noticeable arrhythmia symptoms may include: A fluttering in your chest, A racing heartbeat (tachycardia), A slow heartbeat (bradycardia), Chest pain, Shortness of breath.
Other symptoms may include: Anxiety, Fatigue, Lightheadedness or dizziness, Sweating, Fainting (syncope) or near fainting.
Arrhythmias may cause you to feel premature heartbeats, or you may feel that your heart is racing or beating too slowly. Other signs and symptoms may be related to your heart not pumping effectively due to the fast or slow heartbeat. These include shortness of breath, weakness, dizziness, lightheadedness, fainting or near fainting, and chest pain or discomfort.
Seek urgent medical care if you suddenly or frequently experience any of these signs and symptoms at a time when you wouldn't expect to feel them.
Ventricular fibrillation is one type of arrhythmia that can be deadly. It occurs when the heart beats with rapid, erratic electrical impulses. This causes the lower chambers in your heart (ventricles) to quiver uselessly instead of pumping blood. Without an effective heartbeat, blood pressure plummets, cutting off blood supply to your vital organs.
A person with ventricular fibrillation will collapse within seconds and soon won't be breathing or have a pulse. If this occurs, follow these steps:
Call 911 or the emergency number in your area.
If there's no one nearby trained in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), provide hands-only CPR. That means uninterrupted chest compressions at a rate of 100 to 120 a minute until paramedics arrive. To do chest compressions, push hard and fast in the center of the chest. You don't need to do rescue breathing.
If you or someone nearby knows CPR, begin providing it if it's needed. CPR can help maintain blood flow to the organs until an electrical shock (defibrillation) can be given.
Find out if an automated external defibrillator (AED) is available nearby. These portable defibrillators, which can deliver an electric shock that may restart heartbeats, are available in an increasing number of places, such as in airplanes, police cars and shopping malls. They can even be purchased for your home.
No training is required. The AED will tell you what to do. It's programmed to allow a shock only when appropriate.
Certain conditions can lead to, or cause, an arrhythmia, including: A heart attack that's occurring right now, Scarring of heart tissue from a prior heart attack, Changes to your heart's structure, such as from cardiomyopathy, Blocked arteries in your heart (coronary artery disease), High blood pressure, Overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism), Underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism), Diabetes, Sleep apnea, Infection with COVID-19.
Other things that can cause an arrhythmia include: Smoking, Drinking too much alcohol or caffeine, Drug abuse, Stress or anxiety, Certain medications and supplements, including over-the-counter cold and allergy drugs and nutritional supplements, Genetics.
Certain conditions may increase your risk of developing an arrhythmia. These include:
Coronary artery disease, other heart problems and previous heart surgery. Narrowed heart arteries, a heart attack, abnormal heart valves, prior heart surgery, heart failure, cardiomyopathy and other heart damage are risk factors for almost any kind of arrhythmia.
High blood pressure. This increases your risk of developing coronary artery disease. It may also cause the walls of your left ventricle to become stiff and thick, which can change how electrical impulses travel through your heart.
Congenital heart disease. Being born with a heart abnormality may affect your heart's rhythm.
Thyroid problems. Having an overactive or underactive thyroid gland can raise your risk of arrhythmias.
Diabetes. Your risk of developing coronary artery disease and high blood pressure greatly increases with uncontrolled diabetes.
Obstructive sleep apnea. This disorder, in which your breathing is interrupted during sleep, can increase your risk of bradycardia, atrial fibrillation and other arrhythmias.
Electrolyte imbalance. Substances in your blood called electrolytes — such as potassium, sodium, calcium and magnesium — help trigger and conduct the electrical impulses in your heart. Electrolyte levels that are too high or too low can affect your heart's electrical impulses and contribute to arrhythmia development.
Other factors that may put you at higher risk of developing an arrhythmia include:
Drugs and supplements. Certain over-the-counter cough and cold medicines and certain prescription drugs may contribute to arrhythmia development.
Drinking too much alcohol. Drinking too much alcohol can affect the electrical impulses in your heart and can increase the chance of developing atrial fibrillation.
Caffeine, nicotine or illegal drug use. Caffeine, nicotine and other stimulants can cause your heart to beat faster and may contribute to the development of more-serious arrhythmias. Illegal drugs, such as amphetamines and cocaine, may profoundly affect the heart and lead to many types of arrhythmias or to sudden death due to ventricular fibrillation.
Certain arrhythmias may increase your risk of developing conditions such as:
Stroke. Heart arrhythmias are associated with an increased risk of blood clots. If a clot breaks loose, it can travel from your heart to your brain. There it might block blood flow, causing a stroke. If you have a heart arrhythmia, your risk of stroke is increased if you have an existing heart disease or are 65 or older.
Certain medications, such as blood thinners, can greatly lower your risk of stroke or damage to other organs caused by blood clots. Your doctor will determine if a blood-thinning medication is appropriate for you, depending on your type of arrhythmia and your risk of blood clots.
Heart failure. Heart failure can result if your heart is pumping ineffectively for a prolonged period due to a bradycardia or tachycardia, such as atrial fibrillation. Sometimes controlling the rate of an arrhythmia that's causing heart failure can improve your heart's function.
Common heart attack signs and symptoms include: Pressure, tightness, pain, or a squeezing or aching sensation in your chest or arms that may spread to your neck, jaw or back, Nausea, indigestion, heartburn or abdominal pain, Shortness of breath, Cold sweat, Fatigue, Lightheadedness or sudden dizziness.
Not all people who have heart attacks have the same symptoms or have the same severity of symptoms. Some people have mild pain; others have more severe pain. Some people have no symptoms. For others, the first sign may be sudden cardiac arrest. However, the more signs and symptoms you have, the greater the chance you're having a heart attack.
Some heart attacks strike suddenly, but many people have warning signs and symptoms hours, days or weeks in advance. The earliest warning might be recurrent chest pain or pressure (angina) that's triggered by activity and relieved by rest. Angina is caused by a temporary decrease in blood flow to the heart.
Act immediately. Some people wait too long because they don't recognize the important signs and symptoms. Take these steps:
Call for emergency medical help. If you suspect you're having a heart attack, don't hesitate. Immediately call 911 or your local emergency number. If you don't have access to emergency medical services, have someone drive you to the nearest hospital.
Drive yourself only if there are no other options. Because your condition can worsen, driving yourself puts you and others at risk.
Take nitroglycerin, if prescribed to you by a doctor. Take it as instructed while awaiting emergency help.
Take aspirin, if recommended. Taking aspirin during a heart attack could reduce heart damage by helping to keep your blood from clotting.
Aspirin can interact with other medications, however, so don't take an aspirin unless your doctor or emergency medical personnel recommend it. Don't delay calling 911 to take an aspirin. Call for emergency help first.
If you see someone who's unconscious and you believe is having a heart attack, first call for emergency medical help. Then check if the person is breathing and has a pulse. If the person isn't breathing or you don't find a pulse, only then should you begin CPR.
Push hard and fast on the person's chest in a fairly rapid rhythm — about 100 to 120 compressions a minute.
If you haven't been trained in CPR, doctors recommend performing only chest compressions. If you have been trained in CPR, you can go on to opening the airway and rescue breathing.
A heart attack occurs when one or more of your coronary arteries becomes blocked. Over time, a buildup of fatty deposits, including cholesterol, form substances called plaques, which can narrow the arteries (atherosclerosis). This condition, called coronary artery disease, causes most heart attacks.
During a heart attack, a plaque can rupture and spill cholesterol and other substances into the bloodstream. A blood clot forms at the site of the rupture. If the clot is large, it can block blood flow through the coronary artery, starving the heart of oxygen and nutrients (ischemia).
You might have a complete or partial blockage of the coronary artery.
A complete blockage means you've had an ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI).
A partial blockage means you've had a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI).
Diagnosis and treatment might be different depending on which type you've had.
Another cause of a heart attack is a spasm of a coronary artery that shuts down blood flow to part of the heart muscle. Using tobacco and illicit drugs, such as cocaine, can cause a life-threatening spasm.
Infection with COVID-19 also may damage your heart in ways that result in a heart attack.
Certain factors contribute to the unwanted buildup of fatty deposits (atherosclerosis) that narrows arteries throughout your body. You can improve or eliminate many of these risk factors to reduce your chances of having a first or another heart attack.
Heart attack risk factors include:
Age. Men age 45 or older and women age 55 or older are more likely to have a heart attack than are younger men and women.
Tobacco. This includes smoking and long-term exposure to secondhand smoke.
High blood pressure. Over time, high blood pressure can damage arteries that lead to your heart. High blood pressure that occurs with other conditions, such as obesity, high cholesterol or diabetes, increases your risk even more.
High blood cholesterol or triglyceride levels. A high level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol ("bad" cholesterol) is most likely to narrow arteries. A high level of triglycerides, a type of blood fat related to your diet, also increases your risk of a heart attack. However, a high level of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol ("good" cholesterol) may lower your risk.
Obesity. Obesity is linked with high blood cholesterol levels, high triglyceride levels, high blood pressure and diabetes. Losing just 10% of your body weight can lower this risk.
Diabetes. Not producing enough of a hormone secreted by your pancreas (insulin) or not responding to insulin properly causes your body's blood sugar levels to rise, increasing your risk of a heart attack.
Metabolic syndrome. This syndrome occurs when you have obesity, high blood pressure and high blood sugar. Having metabolic syndrome makes you twice as likely to develop heart disease than if you don't have it.
Family history of heart attacks. If your siblings, parents or grandparents have had early heart attacks (by age 55 for males and by age 65 for females), you might be at increased risk.
Lack of physical activity. Being inactive contributes to high blood cholesterol levels and obesity. People who exercise regularly have better heart health, including lower blood pressure.
Stress. You might respond to stress in ways that can increase your risk of a heart attack.
Illicit drug use. Using stimulant drugs, such as cocaine or amphetamines, can trigger a spasm of your coronary arteries that can cause a heart attack.
A history of preeclampsia. This condition causes high blood pressure during pregnancy and increases the lifetime risk of heart disease.
An autoimmune condition. Having a condition such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus can increase your risk of a heart attack.
Complications are often related to the damage done to your heart during a heart attack, which can lead to:
Abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias). Electrical "short circuits" can develop, resulting in abnormal heart rhythms, some of which can be serious, and may lead to death.
Heart failure. A heart attack might damage so much heart tissue that the remaining heart muscle can't pump enough blood out of your heart. Heart failure can be temporary, or it can be a chronic condition resulting from extensive and permanent damage to your heart.
Sudden cardiac arrest. Without warning, your heart stops due to an electrical disturbance that causes an abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia). Heart attacks increase the risk of sudden cardiac arrest, which can cause death without immediate treatment.
Heart disease symptoms depend on what type of heart disease you have.
Cardiovascular disease symptoms may be different for men and women. For instance, men are more likely to have chest pain; women are more likely to have other symptoms along with chest discomfort, such as shortness of breath, nausea and extreme fatigue.
Symptoms can include: Chest pain, chest tightness, chest pressure and chest discomfort (angina), Shortness of breath, Pain, numbness, weakness or coldness in your legs or arms if the blood vessels in those parts of your body are narrowed, Pain in the neck, jaw, throat, upper abdomen or back.
You might not be diagnosed with cardiovascular disease until you have a heart attack, angina, stroke or heart failure. It's important to watch for cardiovascular symptoms and discuss concerns with your doctor. Cardiovascular disease can sometimes be found early with regular evaluations.
A heart arrhythmia is an abnormal heartbeat. Your heart may beat too quickly, too slowly or irregularly. Heart arrhythmia symptoms can include: Fluttering in your chest, Racing heartbeat (tachycardia), Slow heartbeat (bradycardia), Chest pain or discomfort, Shortness of breath, Lightheadedness, Dizziness, Fainting (syncope) or near fainting.
Serious congenital heart defects — defects you're born with — usually become evident soon after birth. Heart defect symptoms in children could include: Pale gray or blue skin color (cyanosis), Swelling in the legs, abdomen or areas around the eyes, In an infant, shortness of breath during feedings, leading to poor weight gain.
Less serious congenital heart defects are often not diagnosed until later in childhood or during adulthood. Signs and symptoms of congenital heart defects that usually aren't immediately life-threatening include: Easily getting short of breath during exercise or activity, Easily tiring during exercise or activity, Swelling in the hands, ankles or feet.
In early stages of cardiomyopathy, you may have no symptoms. As the condition worsens, symptoms may include: Breathlessness with exertion or at rest, Swelling of the legs, ankles and feet, Fatigue, Irregular heartbeats that feel rapid, pounding or fluttering, Dizziness, lightheadedness and fainting.
Endocarditis is an infection that affects the inner membrane that separates the chambers and valves of the heart (endocardium). Heart infection symptoms can include: Fever, Shortness of breath, Weakness or fatigue, Swelling in your legs or abdomen, Changes in your heart rhythm, Dry or persistent cough, Skin rashes or unusual spots.
The heart has four valves — the aortic, mitral, pulmonary and tricuspid valves — that open and close to direct blood flow through your heart. Valves may be damaged by a variety of conditions leading to narrowing (stenosis), leaking (regurgitation or insufficiency) or improper closing (prolapse).
Depending on which valve isn't working properly, valvular heart disease symptoms generally include: Fatigue, Shortness of breath, Irregular heartbeat, Swollen feet or ankles, Chest pain, Fainting (syncope).
Seek emergency medical care if you have these heart disease symptoms: Chest pain, Shortness of breath, Fainting.
Heart disease is easier to treat when detected early, so talk to your doctor about your concerns regarding your heart health. If you're concerned about developing heart disease, talk to your doctor about steps you can take to reduce your heart disease risk. This is especially important if you have a family history of heart disease.
If you think you may have heart disease, based on new signs or symptoms you're having, make an appointment to see your doctor.
Your heart is a pump. It's a muscular organ about the size of your fist, situated slightly left of center in your chest. Your heart is divided into the right and the left side. The division prevents oxygen-rich blood from mixing with oxygen-poor blood. Oxygen-poor blood returns to the heart after circulating through your body.
The right side of the heart, comprising the right atrium and ventricle, collects and pumps blood to the lungs through the pulmonary arteries.
The lungs refresh the blood with a new supply of oxygen. The lungs also breathe out carbon dioxide, a waste product.
Oxygen-rich blood then enters the left side of the heart, comprising the left atrium and ventricle.
The left side of the heart pumps blood through the aorta to supply tissues throughout the body with oxygen and nutrients.
Four valves within your heart keep your blood moving the right way by opening only one way and only when they need to. To function properly, the valve must be formed properly, must open all the way and must close tightly so there's no leakage. The four valves are: Tricuspid, Mitral, Pulmonary, Aortic.
A beating heart contracts and relaxes in a continuous cycle.
During contraction (systole), your ventricles contract, forcing blood into the vessels to your lungs and body.
During relaxation (diastole), the ventricles are filled with blood coming from the upper chambers (left and right atria).
Your heart's electrical wiring keeps it beating, which controls the continuous exchange of oxygen-rich blood with oxygen-poor blood. This exchange keeps you alive.
Electrical impulses begin high in the right atrium and travel through specialized pathways to the ventricles, delivering the signal for the heart to pump.
The conduction system keeps your heart beating in a coordinated and normal rhythm, which keeps blood circulating.
The causes of heart disease vary by type of heart disease.
While cardiovascular disease can refer to different heart or blood vessel problems, the term is often used to mean damage to your heart or blood vessels by atherosclerosis (ath-ur-o-skluh-ROE-sis), a buildup of fatty plaques in your arteries. Plaque buildup thickens and stiffens artery walls, which can inhibit blood flow through your arteries to your organs and tissues.
Atherosclerosis is also the most common cause of cardiovascular disease. It can be caused by correctable problems, such as an unhealthy diet, lack of exercise, being overweight and smoking.
Common causes of abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias) or conditions that can lead to arrhythmias include: Heart defects you're born with (congenital heart defects), Coronary artery disease, High blood pressure, Diabetes, Smoking, Excessive use of alcohol or caffeine, Drug abuse, Stress, Some over-the-counter medications, prescription medications, dietary supplements and herbal remedies, Valvular heart disease.
In a healthy person with a normal, healthy heart, it's unlikely for a fatal arrhythmia to develop without some outside trigger, such as an electrical shock or the use of illegal drugs. That's primarily because a healthy person's heart is free from any abnormal conditions that cause an arrhythmia, such as an area of scarred tissue.
However, in a heart that's diseased or deformed, the heart's electrical impulses may not properly start or travel through the heart, making arrhythmias more likely to develop.
Congenital heart defects usually develop while a baby is in the womb. Heart defects can develop as the heart develops, about a month after conception, changing the flow of blood in the heart. Some medical conditions, medications and genes may play a role in causing heart defects.
Heart defects can also develop in adults. As you age, your heart's structure can change, causing a heart defect.
The cause of cardiomyopathy, a thickening or enlarging of the heart muscle, may depend on the type:
Dilated cardiomyopathy. The cause of this most common type of cardiomyopathy often is unknown. It may be caused by reduced blood flow to the heart (ischemic heart disease) resulting from damage after a heart attack, infections, toxins and certain drugs. It may also be inherited from a parent. It usually enlarges (dilates) the left ventricle.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This type, in which the heart muscle becomes abnormally thick, usually is inherited. It can also develop over time because of high blood pressure or aging.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy. This least common type of cardiomyopathy, which causes the heart muscle to become rigid and less elastic, can occur for no known reason. Or it may be caused by diseases, such as connective tissue disorders, excessive iron buildup in your body (hemochromatosis), the buildup of abnormal proteins (amyloidosis) or by some cancer treatments.
A heart infection, such as endocarditis, is caused when an irritant, such as a bacterium, virus or chemical, reaches your heart muscle. The most common causes of heart infection include: Bacteria, Viruses, Parasites.
There are many causes of diseases of your heart valves. You may be born with valvular disease, or the valves may be damaged by conditions such as: Rheumatic fever, Infections (infectious endocarditis), Connective tissue disorders.
Risk factors for developing heart disease include:
Age. Aging increases your risk of damaged and narrowed arteries and weakened or thickened heart muscle.
Sex. Men are generally at greater risk of heart disease. However, women's risk increases after menopause.
Family history. A family history of heart disease increases your risk of coronary artery disease, especially if a parent developed it at an early age (before age 55 for a male relative, such as your brother or father, and 65 for a female relative, such as your mother or sister).
Smoking. Nicotine constricts your blood vessels, and carbon monoxide can damage their inner lining, making them more susceptible to atherosclerosis. Heart attacks are more common in smokers than in nonsmokers.
Certain chemotherapy drugs and radiation therapy for cancer. Some chemotherapy drugs and radiation therapies may increase the risk of cardiovascular disease.
Poor diet. A diet that's high in fat, salt, sugar and cholesterol can contribute to the development of heart disease.
High blood pressure. Uncontrolled high blood pressure can result in hardening and thickening of your arteries, narrowing the vessels through which blood flows.
High blood cholesterol levels. High levels of cholesterol in your blood can increase the risk of formation of plaques and atherosclerosis.
Diabetes. Diabetes increases your risk of heart disease. Both conditions share similar risk factors, such as obesity and high blood pressure.
Obesity. Excess weight typically worsens other risk factors.
Physical inactivity. Lack of exercise also is associated with many forms of heart disease and some of its other risk factors, as well.
Stress. Unrelieved stress may damage your arteries and worsen other risk factors for heart disease.
Poor hygiene. Not regularly washing your hands and not establishing other habits that can help prevent viral or bacterial infections can put you at risk of heart infections, especially if you already have an underlying heart condition. Poor dental health also may contribute to heart disease.
Complications of heart disease include:
Heart failure. One of the most common complications of heart disease, heart failure occurs when your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs. Heart failure can result from many forms of heart disease, including heart defects, cardiovascular disease, valvular heart disease, heart infections or cardiomyopathy.
Heart attack.  A blood clot blocking the blood flow through a blood vessel that feeds the heart causes a heart attack, possibly damaging or destroying a part of the heart muscle. Atherosclerosis can cause a heart attack.
Stroke.  The risk factors that lead to cardiovascular disease also can lead to an ischemic stroke, which happens when the arteries to your brain are narrowed or blocked so that too little blood reaches your brain. A stroke is a medical emergency — brain tissue begins to die within just a few minutes of a stroke.
Aneurysm.  A serious complication that can occur anywhere in your body, an aneurysm is a bulge in the wall of your artery. If an aneurysm bursts, you may face life-threatening internal bleeding.
Peripheral artery disease.  Atherosclerosis also can lead to peripheral artery disease. When you develop peripheral artery disease, your extremities — usually your legs — don't receive enough blood flow. This causes symptoms, most notably leg pain when walking (claudication).
Sudden cardiac arrest.  Sudden cardiac arrest is the sudden, unexpected loss of heart function, breathing and consciousness, often caused by an arrhythmia. Sudden cardiac arrest is a medical emergency. If not treated immediately, it is fatal, resulting in sudden cardiac death.
Heart failure can be ongoing (chronic), or your condition may start suddenly (acute).
Heart failure signs and symptoms may include: Shortness of breath (dyspnea) when you exert yourself or when you lie down, Fatigue and weakness, Swelling (edema) in your legs, ankles and feet, Rapid or irregular heartbeat, Reduced ability to exercise, Persistent cough or wheezing with white or pink blood-tinged phlegm, Increased need to urinate at night, Swelling of your abdomen (ascites), Very rapid weight gain from fluid retention, Lack of appetite and nausea, Difficulty concentrating or decreased alertness, Sudden, severe shortness of breath and coughing up pink, foamy mucus, Chest pain if your heart failure is caused by a heart attack.
See your doctor if you think you might be experiencing signs or symptoms of heart failure. Seek emergency treatment if you experience any of the following: Chest pain, Fainting or severe weakness, Rapid or irregular heartbeat associated with shortness of breath, chest pain or fainting, Sudden, severe shortness of breath and coughing up pink, foamy mucus.
Although these signs and symptoms may be due to heart failure, there are many other possible causes, including other life-threatening heart and lung conditions. Don't try to diagnose yourself. Call 911 or your local emergency number for immediate help. Emergency room doctors will try to stabilize your condition and determine if your symptoms are due to heart failure or something else.
If you have a diagnosis of heart failure and if any of the symptoms suddenly become worse or you develop a new sign or symptom, it may mean that existing heart failure is getting worse or not responding to treatment. This may be also the case if you gain 5 pounds (2.3 kg) or more within a few days. Contact your doctor promptly.
Heart failure often develops after other conditions have damaged or weakened your heart. However, the heart doesn't need to be weakened to cause heart failure. It can also occur if the heart becomes too stiff.
In heart failure, the main pumping chambers of your heart (the ventricles) may become stiff and not fill properly between beats. In some cases of heart failure, your heart muscle may become damaged and weakened, and the ventricles stretch (dilate) to the point that the heart can't pump blood efficiently throughout your body.
Over time, the heart can no longer keep up with the normal demands placed on it to pump blood to the rest of your body.
An ejection fraction is an important measurement of how well your heart is pumping and is used to help classify heart failure and guide treatment. In a healthy heart, the ejection fraction is 50 percent or higher — meaning that more than half of the blood that fills the ventricle is pumped out with each beat.
But heart failure can occur even with a normal ejection fraction. This happens if the heart muscle becomes stiff from conditions such as high blood pressure.
Heart failure can involve the left side (left ventricle), right side (right ventricle) or both sides of your heart. Generally, heart failure begins with the left side, specifically the left ventricle — your heart's main pumping chamber.
Any of the following conditions can damage or weaken your heart and can cause heart failure. Some of these can be present without your knowing it:
Coronary artery disease and heart attack. Coronary artery disease is the most common form of heart disease and the most common cause of heart failure. The disease results from the buildup of fatty deposits (plaque) in your arteries, which reduce blood flow and can lead to heart attack.
High blood pressure (hypertension). If your blood pressure is high, your heart has to work harder than it should to circulate blood throughout your body. Over time, this extra exertion can make your heart muscle too stiff or too weak to effectively pump blood.
Faulty heart valves. The valves of your heart keep blood flowing in the proper direction through the heart. A damaged valve — due to a heart defect, coronary artery disease or heart infection — forces your heart to work harder, which can weaken it over time.
Damage to the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy). Heart muscle damage (cardiomyopathy) can have many causes, including several diseases, infections, alcohol abuse and the toxic effect of drugs, such as cocaine or some drugs used for chemotherapy. Genetic factors also can play a role.
Myocarditis. Myocarditis is an inflammation of the heart muscle. It's most commonly caused by a virus, including COVID-19, and can lead to left-sided heart failure.
Heart defects you're born with (congenital heart defects). If your heart and its chambers or valves haven't formed correctly, the healthy parts of your heart have to work harder to pump blood through your heart, which, in turn, may lead to heart failure.
Abnormal heart rhythms (heart arrhythmias). Abnormal heart rhythms may cause your heart to beat too fast, creating extra work for your heart. A slow heartbeat also may lead to heart failure.
Other diseases. Chronic diseases — such as diabetes, HIV, hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, or a buildup of iron (hemochromatosis) or protein (amyloidosis) — also may contribute to heart failure.
Causes of acute heart failure include viruses that attack the heart muscle, severe infections, allergic reactions, blood clots in the lungs, the use of certain medications or any illness that affects the whole body.
A single risk factor may be enough to cause heart failure, but a combination of factors also increases your risk.
Risk factors include:
High blood pressure. Your heart works harder than it has to if your blood pressure is high.
Coronary artery disease. Narrowed arteries may limit your heart's supply of oxygen-rich blood, resulting in weakened heart muscle.
Heart attack. A heart attack is a form of coronary disease that occurs suddenly.  Damage to your heart muscle from a heart attack may mean your heart can no longer pump as well as it should.
Diabetes. Having diabetes increases your risk of high blood pressure and coronary artery disease.
Some diabetes medications. The diabetes drugs rosiglitazone (Avandia) and pioglitazone (Actos) have been found to increase the risk of heart failure in some people. Don't stop taking these medications on your own, though. If you're taking them, discuss with your doctor whether you need to make any changes.
Certain medications. Some medications may lead to heart failure or heart problems.  Medications that may increase the risk of heart problems include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); certain anesthesia medications; some anti-arrhythmic medications; certain medications used to treat high blood pressure, cancer, blood conditions, neurological conditions, psychiatric conditions, lung conditions, urological conditions, inflammatory conditions and infections; and other prescription and over-the-counter medications.
Don't stop taking any medications on your own. If you have questions about medications you're taking, discuss with your doctor whether he or she recommends any changes.
Sleep apnea. The inability to breathe properly while you sleep at night results in low blood oxygen levels and increased risk of abnormal heart rhythms. Both of these problems can weaken the heart.
Congenital heart defects. Some people who develop heart failure were born with structural heart defects.
Valvular heart disease. People with valvular heart disease have a higher risk of heart failure.
Viruses. A viral infection may have damaged your heart muscle.
Alcohol use. Drinking too much alcohol can weaken heart muscle and lead to heart failure.
Tobacco use. Using tobacco can increase your risk of heart failure.
Obesity. People who are obese have a higher risk of developing heart failure.
Irregular heartbeats. These abnormal rhythms, especially if they are very frequent and fast, can weaken the heart muscle and cause heart failure.
If you have heart failure, your outlook depends on the cause and the severity, your overall health, and other factors such as your age. Complications can include:
Kidney damage or failure. Heart failure can reduce the blood flow to your kidneys, which can eventually cause kidney failure if left untreated. Kidney damage from heart failure can require dialysis for treatment.
Heart valve problems. The valves of your heart, which keep blood flowing in the proper direction through your heart, may not function properly if your heart is enlarged or if the pressure in your heart is very high due to heart failure.
Heart rhythm problems. Heart rhythm problems (arrhythmias) can be a potential complication of heart failure.
Liver damage. Heart failure can lead to a buildup of fluid that puts too much pressure on the liver. This fluid backup can lead to scarring, which makes it more difficult for your liver to function properly.
Some people's symptoms and heart function will improve with proper treatment. However, heart failure can be life-threatening. People with heart failure may have severe symptoms, and some may require heart transplantation or support with a ventricular assist device.
If you have an innocent heart murmur, you likely won't have any other signs or symptoms.
An abnormal heart murmur may cause the following signs and symptoms, depending on the cause of the murmur: Skin that appears blue, especially on your fingertips and lips, Swelling or sudden weight gain, Shortness of breath, Chronic cough, Enlarged liver, Enlarged neck veins, In infants, poor appetite and failure to grow normally, Heavy sweating with little or no activity, Chest pain, Dizziness, Fainting.
Most heart murmurs aren't serious, but if you think you or your child has a heart murmur, make an appointment to see your family doctor. Your doctor can tell you if the heart murmur is innocent and doesn't require any further treatment or if an underlying heart problem needs to be further examined.
A heart murmur may happen: When the heart is filling with blood (diastolic murmur), When the heart is emptying (systolic murmur), Throughout the heartbeat (continuous murmur).
A heart murmur may be innocent or abnormal.
A person with an innocent murmur has a normal heart. This type of heart murmur is common in newborns and children.
An innocent murmur can occur when blood flows more rapidly than normal through the heart. Conditions that may cause rapid blood flow through your heart, resulting in an innocent heart murmur, include: Physical activity or exercise, Pregnancy, Fever, Not having enough healthy red blood cells to carry adequate oxygen to your body tissues (anemia), Too much thyroid hormone in your body (hyperthyroidism), Phases of rapid growth, such as adolescence.
Innocent heart murmurs may disappear over time, or they may last your entire life without ever causing further health problems.
In adults, abnormal murmurs are most often due to acquired heart valve problems. In children, abnormal murmurs are usually caused by structural problems of the heart (congenital heart defects).
Common congenital defects that cause heart murmurs include:
Holes in the heart. Known as septal defects, holes in the heart may or may not be serious, depending on the size of the hole and its location.
Cardiac shunts. Cardiac shunts occur when there's an abnormal blood flow between the heart chambers or blood vessels, which may lead to a heart murmur.
Heart valve problems present from birth. Examples include valves that don't allow enough blood through them (stenosis) or those that don't close properly and leak (regurgitation).
In older children and adults, causes of abnormal heart murmurs include infections and conditions that damage the structures of the heart. For example:
Valve calcification. This hardening or thickening of valves, as in mitral stenosis or aortic valve stenosis, can occur as you age. Valves may become narrowed (stenotic), making it harder for blood to flow through your heart, resulting in murmurs.
Endocarditis. This infection of the inner lining of your heart and valves typically occurs when bacteria or other germs from another part of your body, such as your mouth, spread through your bloodstream and get stuck in your heart.
Left untreated, endocarditis can damage or destroy your heart valves. This condition usually occurs in people who already have heart valve problems.
Rheumatic fever. Although now rare in the United States, rheumatic fever is a serious condition that can occur when you don't receive prompt or complete treatment for a strep throat infection. It can permanently affect the heart valves and interfere with normal blood flow through your heart.
You have an increased risk of a heart murmur if someone in your family had a heart defect associated with the unusual sounds.
Many different medical conditions can increase your risk of heart murmurs, including: A weakened heart muscle (cardiomyopathy), An infection of the lining of the heart (endocarditis), Blood disorders marked by a high number of certain white cells, called eosinophils (hypereosinophilic syndrome), Certain autoimmune disorders, including lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, Chemicals from a rare tumor in the lungs or gastrointestinal system that enter your bloodstream (carcinoid syndrome), Heart valve disease, High blood pressure (hypertension), High blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension), History of rheumatic fever, Overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism).
Having uncontrolled diabetes or a rubella infection during pregnancy increases your baby's risk of developing heart defects and a heart murmur. Use of certain medications, alcohol or drugs during pregnancy can lead to heart defects in a developing baby, which may cause a heart murmur.
Heart palpitations can feel like your heart is: Skipping beats, Fluttering rapidly, Beating too fast, Pounding, Flip-flopping.
You might feel heart palpitations in your throat or neck as well as your chest. They can occur when you're active or at rest.
Palpitations that are infrequent and last only a few seconds usually don't need to be evaluated. If you have a history of heart disease and have palpitations that occur frequently or worsen, talk to your doctor. He or she might suggest heart-monitoring tests to see if your palpitations are caused by a more serious heart problem.
Seek emergency medical attention if heart palpitations are accompanied by: Chest discomfort or pain, Fainting, Severe shortness of breath, Severe dizziness.
Often the cause of your heart palpitations can't be found. Common causes include: Strong emotional responses, such as stress, anxiety or panic attacks, Depression, Strenuous exercise, Stimulants, including caffeine, nicotine, cocaine, amphetamines, and cold and cough medications that contain pseudoephedrine, Fever, Hormone changes associated with menstruation, pregnancy or menopause, Too much or to little thyroid hormone.
Occasionally heart palpitations can be a sign of a serious problem, such as an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) or an abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia).
Heart rhythm changes (arrhythmias) might cause a very fast heart rate (tachycardia), an unusually slow heart rate (bradycardia), a normal heart rate that varies from the usual heart rhythm or combination of the three.
You might be at risk of developing palpitations if you: Are highly stressed, Have an anxiety disorder or have regular panic attacks, Are pregnant, Take medicines that contain stimulants, such as some cold or asthma medications, Have an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism), Have other heart problems, such as an arrhythmia, a heart defect, previous heart attack or previous heart surgery.
Unless a heart condition is causing your heart palpitations, there's little risk of complications. For palpitations caused by a heart condition, possible complications include:
Fainting. If your heart beats rapidly, your blood pressure can drop, causing you to faint. This might be more likely if you have a heart problem, such as congenital heart disease or certain valve problems.
Cardiac arrest. Rarely, palpitations can be caused by life-threatening arrhythmias and can cause your heart to stop beating effectively.
Stroke. If palpitations are due to a condition in which the upper chambers of the heart quiver instead of beating properly (atrial fibrillation), blood can pool and cause clots to form. If a clot breaks loose, it can block a brain artery, causing a stroke.
Heart failure. This can result if your heart is pumping ineffectively for a prolonged period due to an arrhythmia, such as atrial fibrillation. Sometimes, controlling the rate of an arrhythmia that's causing heart failure can improve your heart's function.
Some people with heart valve disease might not experience symptoms for many years. Signs and symptoms of heart valve disease may include: Abnormal sound (heart murmur) when a doctor is listening to the heart beating with a stethoscope, Chest pain, Abdominal swelling (more common with advanced tricuspid regurgitation), Fatigue, Shortness of breath, particularly when you have been very active or when you lie down, Swelling of your ankles and feet, Dizziness, Fainting, Irregular heartbeat.
If you have a heart murmur, your doctor may recommend that you visit a cardiologist. If you develop any symptoms that may suggest heart valve disease, see your doctor.
Your heart has four valves that keep blood flowing in the correct direction. These valves include the mitral valve, tricuspid valve, pulmonary valve and aortic valve. Each valve has flaps (leaflets or cusps) that open and close once during each heartbeat. Sometimes, the valves don't open or close properly, disrupting the blood flow through your heart to your body.
Heart valve disease may be present at birth (congenital). It can also occur in adults due to many causes and conditions, such as infections and other heart conditions.
Heart valve problems may include:
Regurgitation. In this condition, the valve flaps don't close properly, causing blood to leak backward in your heart. This commonly occurs due to valve flaps bulging back, a condition called prolapse.
Stenosis. In valve stenosis, the valve flaps become thick or stiff, and they may fuse together. This results in a narrowed valve opening and reduced blood flow through the valve.
Atresia. In this condition, the valve isn't formed, and a solid sheet of tissue blocks the blood flow between the heart chambers.
Several factors can increase your risk of heart valve disease, including: Older age, History of certain infections that can affect the heart, History of certain forms of heart disease or heart attack, High blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes and other heart disease risk factors, Heart conditions present at birth (congenital heart disease).
Heart valve disease can cause many complications, including: Heart failure, Stroke, Blood clots, Heart rhythm abnormalities, Death.
Symptoms of heartburn include: A burning pain in the chest that usually occurs after eating and may occur at night, Pain that worsens when lying down or bending over, Bitter or acidic taste in the mouth.
Seek immediate help if you experience severe chest pain or pressure, especially when combined with other signs and symptoms such as pain in the arm or jaw or difficulty breathing. Chest pain may be a symptom of a heart attack.
Make an appointment with your doctor if: Heartburn occurs more than twice a week, Symptoms persist despite use of over-the-counter medications, You have difficulty swallowing, You have persistent nausea or vomiting, You have weight loss because of poor appetite or difficulty eating.
Heartburn occurs when stomach acid backs up into the tube that carries food from your mouth to your stomach (esophagus).
Normally when you swallow, a band of muscle around the bottom of your esophagus (lower esophageal sphincter) relaxes to allow food and liquid to flow down into your stomach. Then the muscle tightens again.
If the lower esophageal sphincter relaxes abnormally or weakens, stomach acid can flow back up into your esophagus (acid reflux) and cause heartburn. The acid backup may be worse when you're bent over or lying down.
Certain foods and drinks can trigger heartburn in some people, including: Spicy foods, Onions, Citrus products, Tomato products, such as ketchup, Fatty or fried foods, Peppermint, Chocolate, Alcohol, carbonated beverages, coffee or other caffeinated beverages, Large or fatty meals.
Being overweight or pregnant also can increase your risk of experiencing heartburn.
Heartburn that occurs frequently and interferes with your routine is considered gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). GERD treatment may require prescription medications and, occasionally, surgery or other procedures. GERD can seriously damage your esophagus or lead to precancerous changes in the esophagus called Barrett's esophagus.
Signs and symptoms of heat exhaustion may develop suddenly or over time, especially with prolonged periods of exercise. Possible heat exhaustion signs and symptoms include: Cool, moist skin with goose bumps when in the heat, Heavy sweating, Faintness, Dizziness, Fatigue, Weak, rapid pulse, Low blood pressure upon standing, Muscle cramps, Nausea, Headache.
If you think you're experiencing heat exhaustion: Stop all activity and rest, Move to a cooler place, Drink cool water or sports drinks.
Contact your doctor if your signs or symptoms worsen or if they don't improve within one hour. If you are with someone showing signs of heat exhaustion, seek immediate medical attention if he or she becomes confused or agitated, loses consciousness, or is unable to drink. You will need immediate cooling and urgent medical attention if your core body temperature (measured by a rectal thermometer) reaches 104 F (40 C) or higher.
Your body's heat combined with environmental heat results in what's called your core temperature — your body's internal temperature. Your body needs to regulate the heat gain (and, in cold weather, heat loss) from the environment to maintain a core temperature that's normal, approximately 98.6 F (37 C).
In hot weather, your body cools itself mainly by sweating. The evaporation of your sweat regulates your body temperature. However, when you exercise strenuously or otherwise overexert in hot, humid weather, your body is less able to cool itself efficiently.
As a result, your body may develop heat cramps, the mildest form of heat-related illness. Signs and symptoms of heat cramps usually include heavy sweating, fatigue, thirst and muscle cramps. Prompt treatment usually prevents heat cramps from progressing to heat exhaustion.
You usually can treat heat cramps by drinking fluids or sports drinks containing electrolytes (Gatorade, Powerade, others), getting into cooler temperatures, such as an air-conditioned or shaded place, and resting.
Besides hot weather and strenuous activity, other causes of heat exhaustion include: Dehydration, which reduces your body's ability to sweat and maintain a normal temperature, Alcohol use, which can affect your body's ability to regulate your temperature, Overdressing, particularly in clothes that don't allow sweat to evaporate easily.
Anyone can develop heat exhaustion, but certain factors increase your sensitivity to heat. They include:
Young age or old age. Infants and children younger than 4 and adults older than 65 are at higher risk of heat exhaustion. The body's ability to regulate its temperature isn't fully developed in the young and may be reduced by illness, medications or other factors in older adults.
Certain drugs. Medications that affect your body's ability to stay hydrated and respond appropriately to heat include some used to treat high blood pressure and heart problems (beta blockers, diuretics), reduce allergy symptoms (antihistamines), calm you (tranquilizers), or reduce psychiatric symptoms such as delusions (antipsychotics). Additionally, some illegal drugs, such as cocaine and amphetamines, can increase your core temperature.
Obesity. Carrying excess weight can affect your body's ability to regulate its temperature and cause your body to retain more heat.
Sudden temperature changes. If you're not used to the heat, you're more susceptible to heat-related illnesses, such as heat exhaustion. Traveling to a warm climate from a cold one or living in an area that has experienced an early heat wave can put you at risk of a heat-related illness because your body hasn't had a chance to get used to the higher temperatures.
A high heat index. The heat index is a single temperature value that considers how both the outdoor temperature and humidity make you feel. When the humidity is high, your sweat can't evaporate as easily and your body has more difficulty cooling itself, making you prone to heat exhaustion and heatstroke. When the heat index is 91 F (33 C) or higher, you should take precautions to keep cool.
Untreated, heat exhaustion can lead to heatstroke, a life-threatening condition that occurs when your core body temperature reaches 104 F (40 C) or higher. Heatstroke requires immediate medical attention to prevent permanent damage to your brain and other vital organs that can result in death.
Adults usually develop heat rash in skin folds and where clothing causes friction. In infants, the rash is mainly found on the neck, shoulders and chest. It can also show up in the armpits, elbow creases and groin.
The types of miliaria are classified according to how deep the blocked sweat ducts are. Signs and symptoms for each type vary.
The mildest form of heat rash (miliaria crystallina) affects the sweat ducts in the top layer of skin. This form is marked by clear, fluid-filled blisters and bumps (papules) that break easily.
A type that occurs deeper in the skin (miliaria rubra) is sometimes called prickly heat. Signs and symptoms include red bumps and itching or prickling in the affected area.
Occasionally, the fluid-containing sacs (vesicles) of miliaria rubra become inflamed and pus-filled (pustular). This form is called miliaria pustulosa.
A less common form of heat rash (miliaria profunda) affects the dermis, a deeper layer of skin. Retained sweat leaks out of the sweat gland into the skin, causing firm, flesh-colored lesions that resemble goose bumps.
Heat rash usually heals by cooling the skin and avoiding exposure to the heat that caused it. See your doctor if you or your child has symptoms that last longer than a few days, the rash seems to be getting worse, or you notice signs of infection, such as: Increased pain, swelling, redness or warmth around the affected area, Pus draining from the lesions, Swollen lymph nodes in the armpit, neck or groin, A fever or chills.
Heat rash develops when some of your sweat ducts clog. Instead of evaporating, perspiration gets trapped beneath the skin, causing inflammation and rash.
It's not always clear why the sweat ducts become blocked, but certain factors seem to play a role, including:
Immature sweat ducts. A newborn's sweat ducts aren't fully developed. They can rupture more easily, trapping perspiration beneath the skin. Heat rash can develop in the first week of life, especially if the infant is being warmed in an incubator, is dressed too warmly or has a fever.
Tropical climates. Hot, humid weather can cause heat rash.
Physical activity. Intense exercise, hard work or any activity that causes you to sweat heavily can lead to heat rash.
Overheating. Overheating in general — dressing too warmly or sleeping under an electric blanket — can lead to heat rash.
Prolonged bed rest. Heat rash can also occur in people who are confined to bed for long periods, especially if they have a fever.
Factors that make you more prone to heat rash include:
Age. Newborns are most susceptible.
Tropical climates. People living in the tropics are far more likely to have heat rash than are people in temperate climates.
Physical activity. Anything that makes you sweat heavily, especially if you're not wearing clothing that allows the sweat to evaporate, can trigger heat rash.
Heat rash usually heals without problems, but it can lead to infection with bacteria, causing inflamed and itchy pustules.
Heatstroke signs and symptoms include:
High body temperature. A core body temperature of 104 F (40 C) or higher, obtained with a rectal thermometer, is the main sign of heatstroke.
Altered mental state or behavior. Confusion, agitation, slurred speech, irritability, delirium, seizures and coma can all result from heatstroke.
Alteration in sweating. In heatstroke brought on by hot weather, your skin will feel hot and dry to the touch. However, in heatstroke brought on by strenuous exercise, your skin may feel dry or slightly moist.
Nausea and vomiting. You may feel sick to your stomach or vomit.
Flushed skin. Your skin may turn red as your body temperature increases.
Rapid breathing. Your breathing may become rapid and shallow.
Racing heart rate. Your pulse may significantly increase because heat stress places a tremendous burden on your heart to help cool your body.
Headache. Your head may throb.
If you think a person may be experiencing heatstroke, seek immediate medical help. Call 911 or your local emergency services number.
Take immediate action to cool the overheated person while waiting for emergency treatment.
Get the person into shade or indoors.
Remove excess clothing.
Cool the person with whatever means available — put in a cool tub of water or a cool shower, spray with a garden hose, sponge with cool water, fan while misting with cool water, or place ice packs or cold, wet towels on the person's head, neck, armpits and groin.
Heatstroke can occur as a result of:
Exposure to a hot environment. In a type of heatstroke, called nonexertional (classic) heatstroke, being in a hot environment leads to a rise in core body temperature. This type of heatstroke typically occurs after exposure to hot, humid weather, especially for prolonged periods. It occurs most often in older adults and in people with chronic illness.
Strenuous activity. Exertional heatstroke is caused by an increase in core body temperature brought on by intense physical activity in hot weather. Anyone exercising or working in hot weather can get exertional heatstroke, but it's most likely to occur if you're not used to high temperatures.
In either type of heatstroke, your condition can be brought on by: Wearing excess clothing that prevents sweat from evaporating easily and cooling your body, Drinking alcohol, which can affect your body's ability to regulate your temperature, Becoming dehydrated by not drinking enough water to replenish fluids lost through sweating.
Anyone can develop heatstroke, but several factors increase your risk:
Age. Your ability to cope with extreme heat depends on the strength of your central nervous system. In the very young, the central nervous system is not fully developed, and in adults over 65, the central nervous system begins to deteriorate, which makes your body less able to cope with changes in body temperature. Both age groups usually have difficulty remaining hydrated, which also increases risk.
Exertion in hot weather. Military training and participating in sports, such as football or long-distance running events, in hot weather are among the situations that can lead to heatstroke.
Sudden exposure to hot weather. You may be more susceptible to heat-related illness if you're exposed to a sudden increase in temperature, such as during an early-summer heat wave or travel to a hotter climate.
Limit activity for at least several days to allow yourself to acclimate to the change. However, you may still have an increased risk of heatstroke until you've experienced several weeks of higher temperatures.
A lack of air conditioning. Fans may make you feel better, but during sustained hot weather, air conditioning is the most effective way to cool down and lower humidity.
Certain medications. Some medications affect your body's ability to stay hydrated and respond to heat. Be especially careful in hot weather if you take medications that narrow your blood vessels (vasoconstrictors), regulate your blood pressure by blocking adrenaline (beta blockers), rid your body of sodium and water (diuretics), or reduce psychiatric symptoms (antidepressants or antipsychotics).
Stimulants for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and illegal stimulants such as amphetamines and cocaine also make you more vulnerable to heatstroke.
Certain health conditions. Certain chronic illnesses, such as heart or lung disease, might increase your risk of heatstroke. So can being obese, being sedentary and having a history of previous heatstroke.
Heatstroke can result in a number of complications, depending on how long the body temperature is high. Severe complications include:
Vital organ damage. Without a quick response to lower body temperature, heatstroke can cause your brain or other vital organs to swell, possibly resulting in permanent damage.
Death. Without prompt and adequate treatment, heatstroke can be fatal.
Most people with H. pylori infection will never have any signs or symptoms. It's not clear why this is, but some people may be born with more resistance to the harmful effects of H. pylori.
When signs or symptoms do occur with H. pylori infection, they may include: An ache or burning pain in your abdomen, Abdominal pain that's worse when your stomach is empty, Nausea, Loss of appetite, Frequent burping, Bloating, Unintentional weight loss.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you. Seek immediate medical help if you experience: Severe or persistent abdominal pain, Difficulty swallowing, Bloody or black tarry stools, Bloody or black vomit or vomit that looks like coffee grounds.
The exact way H. pylori infects someone is still unknown. H. pylori bacteria may be passed from person to person through direct contact with saliva, vomit or fecal matter. H. pylori may also be spread through contaminated food or water.
H. pylori infection is often acquired in childhood. Risk factors for H. pylori infection are related to living conditions in your childhood, such as:
Living in crowded conditions. You have a greater risk of H. pylori infection if you live in a home with many other people.
Living without a reliable supply of clean water. Having a reliable supply of clean, running water helps reduce the risk of H. pylori.
Living in a developing country. People living in developing countries, where crowded and unsanitary living conditions may be more common, have a higher risk of H. pylori infection.
Living with someone who has an H. pylori infection. If someone you live with has H. pylori infection, you're more likely to also have H. pylori infection.
Complications associated with H. pylori infection include:
Ulcers. H. pylori can damage the protective lining of your stomach and small intestine. This can allow stomach acid to create an open sore (ulcer). About 10% of people with H. pylori will develop an ulcer.
Inflammation of the stomach lining. H. pylori infection can irritate your stomach, causing inflammation (gastritis).
Stomach cancer. H. pylori infection is a strong risk factor for certain types of stomach cancer.
A hemangioma may be present at birth, but more often appears during the first several months of life. It starts as a flat red mark anywhere on the body, most often on the face, scalp, chest or back. Usually a child has only one mark. Some children may have more than one, particularly if they're part of a multiple birth.
During your child's first year, the red mark grows rapidly into a spongy, rubbery-looking bump that sticks out from the skin. The hemangioma then enters a rest phase and, eventually, it begins to slowly disappear.
Many hemangiomas disappear by age 5, and most are gone by age 10. The skin may be slightly discolored or raised after the hemangioma goes away.
Your child's doctor will monitor the hemangioma during routine checkups. Contact your child's doctor if the hemangioma bleeds, forms a sore or looks infected.
Seek medical care if the condition interferes with your child's vision, breathing, hearing or elimination.
A hemangioma is made up of extra blood vessels that group together into a dense clump. What causes the vessels to clump isn't known.
Hemangiomas occur more often in babies who are female, white and born prematurely.
Occasionally, a hemangioma can break down and develop a sore. This can lead to pain, bleeding, scarring or infection. Depending on where the hemangioma is situated, it may interfere with your child's vision, breathing, hearing or elimination, but this is rare.
Hemifacial spasm is most often caused by a blood vessel touching a facial nerve. It can also be caused by a facial nerve injury or a tumor. Sometimes there's no identifiable cause.
Some people with hereditary hemochromatosis never have symptoms. Early signs and symptoms often overlap with those of other common conditions.
Signs and symptoms may include: Joint pain, Abdominal pain, Fatigue, Weakness, Diabetes, Loss of sex drive, Impotence, Heart failure, Liver failure, Bronze or gray skin color, Memory fog.
Hereditary hemochromatosis is present at birth. But, most people don't experience signs and symptoms until later in life — usually after the age of 40 in men and after age 60 in women. Women are more likely to develop symptoms after menopause, when they no longer lose iron with menstruation and pregnancy.
See your doctor if you experience any of the signs and symptoms of hereditary hemochromatosis. If you have an immediate family member who has hemochromatosis, ask your doctor about genetic tests that can determine if you have inherited the gene that increases your risk of hemochromatosis.
Hereditary hemochromatosis is caused by a mutation in a gene that controls the amount of iron your body absorbs from the food you eat. These mutations are passed from parents to children. This type of hemochromatosis is by far the most common type.
A gene called HFE is most often the cause of hereditary hemochromatosis. You inherit one HFE gene from each of your parents. The HFE gene has two common mutations, C282Y and H63D. Genetic testing can reveal whether you have these mutations in your HFE gene.
If you inherit 2 abnormal genes, you may develop hemochromatosis. You can also pass the mutation on to your children. But, not everyone who inherits two genes develops problems linked to the iron overload of hemochromatosis.
If you inherit 1 abnormal gene, you're unlikely to develop hemochromatosis. However, you are considered a gene mutation carrier and can pass the mutation on to your children. But your children wouldn't develop disease unless they also inherited another abnormal gene from the other parent.
Iron plays an essential role in several body functions, including helping in the formation of blood. But, too much iron is toxic.
A hormone called hepcidin, secreted by the liver, normally controls how iron is used and absorbed in the body, as well as how excess iron is stored in various organs. In hemochromatosis, the normal role of hepcidin is disrupted, causing your body to absorb more iron that it needs.
This excess iron is stored in major organs, especially your liver. Over a period of years, the stored iron can cause severe damage that may lead to organ failure and chronic diseases, such as cirrhosis, diabetes and heart failure. Though many people have faulty genes that cause hemochromatosis, only about 10 percent of them develop iron overload to a degree that causes tissue and organ damage.
Hereditary hemochromatosis isn't the only type of hemochromatosis. Other types include:
Juvenile hemochromatosis. This causes the same problems in young people that hereditary hemochromatosis causes in adults. But iron accumulation begins much earlier, and symptoms usually appear between the ages of 15 and 30. This disorder is caused by mutations in the hemojuvelin or hepcidin genes.
Neonatal hemochromatosis. In this severe disorder, iron builds up rapidly in the liver of the developing fetus. It is thought to be an autoimmune disease, in which the body attacks itself.
Secondary hemochromatosis. This form of the disease is not inherited and is often referred to as iron overload. People with certain types of anemia or chronic liver disease may need multiple blood transfusions, which can lead to excess iron accumulation.
Factors that increase your risk of hereditary hemochromatosis include:
Having 2 copies of a mutated HFE gene. This is the greatest risk factor for hereditary hemochromatosis.
Family history. If you have a first-degree relative — a parent or sibling — with hemochromatosis, you're more likely to develop the disease.
Ethnicity. People of Northern European descent are more prone to hereditary hemochromatosis than are people of other ethnic backgrounds. Hemochromatosis is less common in African-Americans, Hispanics and Asian-Americans.
Your sex. Men are more likely than women to develop signs and symptoms of hemochromatosis at an earlier age. Because women lose iron through menstruation and pregnancy, they tend to store less of the mineral than men do. After menopause or a hysterectomy, the risk for women increases.
Untreated, hereditary hemochromatosis can lead to a number of complications, especially in your joints and in organs where excess iron tends to be stored — your liver, pancreas and heart. Complications can include:
Liver problems. Cirrhosis — permanent scarring of the liver — is just one of the problems that may occur. Cirrhosis increases your risk of liver cancer and other life-threatening complications.
Pancreas problems. Damage to the pancreas can lead to diabetes.
Heart problems. Excess iron in your heart affects the heart's ability to circulate enough blood for your body's needs. This is called congestive heart failure. Hemochromatosis can also cause abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias).
Reproductive problems. Excess iron can lead to erectile dysfunction (impotence), and loss of sex drive in men and absence of the menstrual cycle in women.
Skin color changes. Deposits of iron in skin cells can make your skin appear bronze or gray in color.
The signs and symptoms of HUS may vary, depending on the cause. Most cases of HUS are caused by infection with certain strains of E. coli bacteria, which first affect the digestive tract. The initial signs and symptoms of this form of HUS may include: Diarrhea, which is often bloody, Abdominal pain, cramping or bloating, Vomiting, Fever.
All forms of HUS — no matter the cause — damage the blood vessels. This damage causes red blood cells to break down (anemia), blood clots to form in the blood vessels and kidney damage. Signs and symptoms of these changes include: Pale coloring, including loss of pink color in cheeks and inside the lower eyelids, Extreme fatigue, Shortness of breath, Easy bruising or unexplained bruises, Unusual bleeding, such as bleeding from the nose and mouth, Decreased urination or blood in the urine, Swelling (edema) of the legs, feet or ankles, and less often in the face, hands, feet or entire body, Confusion, seizures or stroke, High blood pressure.
See your doctor immediately if you or your child experiences bloody diarrhea or several days of diarrhea followed by: Decreased urine output, Swelling, Unexplained bruises, Unusual bleeding, Extreme fatigue.
Seek emergency care if you or your child doesn't urinate for 12 hours or more.
The most common cause of HUS — particularly in children under the age of 5 — is infection with certain strains of E. coli bacteria. E. coli refers to a group of bacteria normally found in the intestines of healthy humans and animals. Most of the hundreds of types of E. coli are normal and harmless. But some strains of E. coli cause diarrhea.
Some of the E.coli strains that cause diarrhea also produce a toxin called Shiga toxin. These strains are called Shiga toxin-producing E. coli, or STEC. When you are infected with a strain of STEC, the Shiga toxin can enter your bloodstream and cause damage to your blood vessels, which may lead to HUS. But most people who are infected with E. coli, even the more dangerous strains, don't develop HUS.
Other causes of HUS can include: Other infections, such as infection with pneumococcal bacteria, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or influenza, The use of certain medications, especially some of the medications used to treat cancer and some of the medications used to suppress the immune system of organ transplant recipients, Rarely, HUS may occur as a complication of pregnancy or health conditions such as autoimmune disease or cancer.
An uncommon type of HUS — known as atypical HUS — can be passed down genetically to children. People who have inherited the mutated gene that causes this form of HUS won't necessarily develop the condition. But the mutated gene might be activated after exposure to a trigger, such as an infection, the use of certain medications or a chronic health condition.
The majority of HUS cases are caused by infection with certain strains of E. coli bacteria. Exposure to E. coli can occur when you: Eat contaminated meat or produce, Swim in pools or lakes contaminated with feces, Have close contact with an infected person, such as within a family or at a child care center..
The risk of developing HUS is highest for: Children 5 years of age or younger, Adults 65 years of age or older, People who have a weakened immune system, People with certain genetic changes that make them more susceptible to HUS.
HUS can cause life-threatening complications, including: Kidney failure, which can be sudden (acute) or develop over time (chronic), High blood pressure, Stroke or seizures, Coma, Clotting problems, which can lead to bleeding, Heart problems, Digestive tract problems, such as problems with the intestines, gallbladder or pancreas.
Signs and symptoms of hemophilia vary, depending on your level of clotting factors. If your clotting-factor level is mildly reduced, you may bleed only after surgery or trauma. If your deficiency is severe, you may experience spontaneous bleeding.
Signs and symptoms of spontaneous bleeding include: Unexplained and excessive bleeding from cuts or injuries, or after surgery or dental work, Many large or deep bruises, Unusual bleeding after vaccinations, Pain, swelling or tightness in your joints, Blood in your urine or stool, Nosebleeds without a known cause, In infants, unexplained irritability.
A simple bump on the head can cause bleeding into the brain for some people who have severe hemophilia. This rarely happens, but it's one of the most serious complications that can occur. Signs and symptoms include: Painful, prolonged headache, Repeated vomiting, Sleepiness or lethargy, Double vision, Sudden weakness or clumsiness, Convulsions or seizures.
Seek emergency care if you or your child experiences: Signs or symptoms of bleeding into the brain, An injury in which the bleeding won't stop, Swollen joints that are hot to the touch and painful to bend.
If you have a family history of hemophilia, you may want to undergo genetic testing to see if you're a carrier of the disease before you start a family.
When you bleed, your body normally pools blood cells together to form a clot to stop the bleeding. The clotting process is encouraged by certain blood particles. Hemophilia occurs when you have a deficiency in one of these clotting factors.
There are several types of hemophilia, and most forms are inherited. However, about 30% of people with hemophilia have no family history of the disorder. In these people, an unexpected change occurs in one of the genes associated with hemophilia.
Acquired hemophilia is a rare variety of the condition that occurs when a person's immune system attacks clotting factors in the blood. It can be associated with: Pregnancy, Autoimmune conditions, Cancer, Multiple sclerosis.
In the most common types of hemophilia, the faulty gene is located on the X chromosome. Everyone has two sex chromosomes, one from each parent. A female inherits an X chromosome from her mother and an X chromosome from her father. A male inherits an X chromosome from his mother and a Y chromosome from his father.
This means that hemophilia almost always occurs in boys and is passed from mother to son through one of the mother's genes. Most women with the defective gene are simply carriers and experience no signs or symptoms of hemophilia. But some carriers can experience bleeding symptoms if their clotting factors are moderately decreased.
The biggest risk factor for hemophilia is to have family members who also have the disorder.
Complications of hemophilia may include:
Deep internal bleeding. Bleeding that occurs in deep muscle can cause your limbs to swell. The swelling may press on nerves and lead to numbness or pain.
Damage to joints. Internal bleeding may also put pressure on your joints, causing severe pain. Left untreated, frequent internal bleeding may cause arthritis or destruction of the joint.
Infection. People with hemophilia are likelier to have blood transfusions, increasing their risk of receiving contaminated blood products. Blood products became safer after the mid-1980s due to screening of donated blood for hepatitis and HIV.
Adverse reaction to clotting factor treatment. In some people with severe hemophilia, the immune system has a negative reaction to the clotting factors used to treat bleeding. When this happens, the immune system develops proteins (known as inhibitors) that inactivate the clotting factors, making treatment less effective.
Signs and symptoms of hemorrhoids usually depend on the type of hemorrhoid.
These are under the skin around your anus. Signs and symptoms might include: Itching or irritation in your anal region, Pain or discomfort, Swelling around your anus, Bleeding.
Internal hemorrhoids lie inside the rectum. You usually can't see or feel them, and they rarely cause discomfort. But straining or irritation when passing stool can cause:
Painless bleeding during bowel movements. You might notice small amounts of bright red blood on your toilet tissue or in the toilet.
A hemorrhoid to push through the anal opening (prolapsed or protruding hemorrhoid), resulting in pain and irritation.
If blood pools in an external hemorrhoid and forms a clot (thrombus), it can result in: Severe pain, Swelling, Inflammation, A hard lump near your anus.
If you have bleeding during bowel movements or you have hemorrhoids that don't improve after a week of home care, talk to your doctor.
Don't assume rectal bleeding is due to hemorrhoids, especially if you have changes in bowel habits or if your stools change in color or consistency. Rectal bleeding can occur with other diseases, including colorectal cancer and anal cancer.
Seek emergency care if you have large amounts of rectal bleeding, lightheadedness, dizziness or faintness.
The veins around your anus tend to stretch under pressure and may bulge or swell. Hemorrhoids can develop from increased pressure in the lower rectum due to: Straining during bowel movements, Sitting for long periods of time on the toilet, Having chronic diarrhea or constipation, Being obese, Being pregnant, Having anal intercourse, Eating a low-fiber diet, Regular heavy lifting.
As you age, your risk of hemorrhoids increases. That's because the tissues that support the veins in your rectum and anus can weaken and stretch. This can also happen when you're pregnant, because the baby's weight puts pressure on the anal region.
Complications of hemorrhoids are rare but include:
Anemia. Rarely, chronic blood loss from hemorrhoids may cause anemia, in which you don't have enough healthy red blood cells to carry oxygen to your cells.
Strangulated hemorrhoid. If the blood supply to an internal hemorrhoid is cut off, the hemorrhoid may be "strangulated," which can cause extreme pain.
Blood clot. Occasionally, a clot can form in a hemorrhoid (thrombosed hemorrhoid). Although not dangerous, it can be extremely painful and sometimes needs to be lanced and drained.
The four main characteristics of Henoch-Schonlein purpura include:
Rash (purpura). Reddish-purple spots that look like bruises develop on the buttocks, legs and feet. The rash can also appear on the arms, face and trunk and may be worse in areas of pressure, such as the sock line and waistline.
Swollen, sore joints (arthritis). People with Henoch-Schonlein purpura often have pain and swelling around the joints — mainly in the knees and ankles. Joint pain sometimes precedes the classical rash by one or two weeks. These symptoms subside when the disease clears and leave no lasting damage.
Digestive tract symptoms. Many children with Henoch-Schonlein purpura develop belly pain, nausea, vomiting and bloody stools. These symptoms sometimes occur before the rash appears.
Kidney involvement. Henoch-Schonlein purpura can also affect the kidneys. In most cases, this shows up as protein or blood in the urine, which you may not even know is there unless you have a urine test done. Usually this goes away once the illness passes, but some people develop persistent kidney disease.
See your doctor if you have Henoch-Schonlein purpura and it's causing serious problems with your digestive tract.
If your child develops the rash associated with this condition, see your doctor as soon as possible.
In Henoch-Schonlein purpura, some of the body's small blood vessels become inflamed, which can cause bleeding in the skin, abdomen and kidneys. It's not clear why this initial inflammation develops. It may be the result of the immune system responding inappropriately to certain triggers.
Nearly half the people who have Henoch-Schonlein purpura developed it after an upper respiratory infection, such as a cold. Other triggers include chickenpox, strep throat, measles, hepatitis, certain medications, food, insect bites and exposure to cold weather.
Factors that increase the risk of developing Henoch-Schonlein purpura include:
Age. The disease affects primarily children and young adults, with the majority of cases occurring in children between the ages of 2 and 6.
Sex. Henoch-Schonlein purpura is slightly more common in males than in females.
Race. White and Asian children are more likely to develop Henoch-Schonlein purpura than are black children.
For most people, symptoms improve within a month, leaving no lasting problems. But recurrences are fairly common.
Complications associated with Henoch-Schonlein purpura include:
Kidney damage. The most serious complication of Henoch-Schonlein purpura is kidney damage. This risk is greater in adults than in children. Occasionally the damage is severe enough that dialysis or a kidney transplant is needed.
Bowel obstruction. In rare cases, Henoch-Schonlein purpura can cause intussusception — a condition in which a section of the bowel folds into itself like a telescope, which prevents matter from moving through the bowel.
Hepatitis A signs and symptoms typically don't appear until you've had the virus for a few weeks. But not everyone with hepatitis A develops them. If you do, hepatitis signs and symptoms can include: Fatigue, Sudden nausea and vomiting, Abdominal pain or discomfort, especially on the upper right side beneath your lower ribs (by your liver), Clay-colored bowel movements, Loss of appetite, Low-grade fever, Dark urine, Joint pain, Yellowing of the skin and the whites of your eyes (jaundice), Intense itching.
These symptoms may be relatively mild and go away in a few weeks. Sometimes, however, hepatitis A infection results in a severe illness that lasts several months.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have signs or symptoms of hepatitis A.
Getting a hepatitis A vaccine or an injection of immunoglobulin (an antibody) within two weeks of exposure to hepatitis A may protect you from infection. Ask your doctor or your local health department about receiving the hepatitis A vaccine if: You've traveled out of the country recently, particularly to Mexico or South or Central America, or to areas with poor sanitation, A restaurant where you recently ate reports a hepatitis A outbreak, Someone close to you, such as a roommate or caregiver, is diagnosed with hepatitis A, You recently had sexual contact with someone who has hepatitis A.
Hepatitis A is caused by a virus that infects liver cells and causes inflammation. The inflammation can affect how your liver works and cause other signs and symptoms of hepatitis A.
The virus most commonly spreads when you eat or drink something contaminated with fecal matter, even just tiny amounts. It does not spread through sneezing or coughing.
Here are some of the specific ways the hepatitis A virus can spread: Eating food handled by someone with the virus who doesn't thoroughly wash his or her hands after using the toilet, Drinking contaminated water, Eating raw shellfish from water polluted with sewage, Being in close contact with a person who's infected — even if that person has no signs or symptoms, Having sex with someone who has the virus.
You're at increased risk of hepatitis A if you: Travel or work in areas of the world where hepatitis A is common, Attend child care or work in a child care center, Live with another person who has hepatitis A, Are a man who has sexual contact with other men, Have any type of sexual contact with someone who has hepatitis A, Are HIV positive, Are experiencing homelessness, Have a clotting-factor disorder, such as hemophilia, Use any type of illegal drugs (not just those that are injected).
Unlike other types of viral hepatitis, hepatitis A does not cause long-term liver damage, and it doesn't become chronic.
In rare cases, hepatitis A can cause a sudden loss of liver function, especially in older adults or people with chronic liver diseases. Acute liver failure requires a stay in the hospital for monitoring and treatment. Some people with acute liver failure may need a liver transplant.
Signs and symptoms of hepatitis B range from mild to severe. They usually appear about one to four months after you've been infected, although you could see them as early as two weeks post-infection. Some people, usually young children, may not have any symptoms.
Hepatitis B signs and symptoms may include: Abdominal pain, Dark urine, Fever, Joint pain, Loss of appetite, Nausea and vomiting, Weakness and fatigue, Yellowing of your skin and the whites of your eyes (jaundice).
If you know you've been exposed to hepatitis B, contact your doctor immediately. A preventive treatment may reduce your risk of infection if you receive the treatment within 24 hours of exposure to the virus.
If you think you have signs or symptoms of hepatitis B, contact your doctor.
Hepatitis B infection is caused by the hepatitis B virus (HBV). The virus is passed from person to person through blood, semen or other body fluids. It does not spread by sneezing or coughing.
Common ways that HBV can spread are:
Sexual contact. You may get hepatitis B if you have unprotected sex with someone who is infected. The virus can pass to you if the person's blood, saliva, semen or vaginal secretions enter your body.
Sharing of needles. HBV easily spreads through needles and syringes contaminated with infected blood. Sharing IV drug paraphernalia puts you at high risk of hepatitis B.
Accidental needle sticks. Hepatitis B is a concern for health care workers and anyone else who comes in contact with human blood.
Mother to child. Pregnant women infected with HBV can pass the virus to their babies during childbirth. However, the newborn can be vaccinated to avoid getting infected in almost all cases. Talk to your doctor about being tested for hepatitis B if you are pregnant or want to become pregnant.
Hepatitis B infection may be either short-lived (acute) or long lasting (chronic).
Acute hepatitis B infection lasts less than six months. Your immune system likely can clear acute hepatitis B from your body, and you should recover completely within a few months. Most people who get hepatitis B as adults have an acute infection, but it can lead to chronic infection.
Chronic hepatitis B infection lasts six months or longer. It lingers because your immune system can't fight off the infection. Chronic hepatitis B infection may last a lifetime, possibly leading to serious illnesses such as cirrhosis and liver cancer.
The younger you are when you get hepatitis B — particularly newborns or children younger than 5 — the higher your risk of the infection becoming chronic. Chronic infection may go undetected for decades until a person becomes seriously ill from liver disease.
Hepatitis B spreads through contact with blood, semen or other body fluids from an infected person. Your risk of hepatitis B infection increases if you: Have unprotected sex with multiple sex partners or with someone who's infected with HBV, Share needles during IV drug use, Are a man who has sex with other men, Live with someone who has a chronic HBV infection, Are an infant born to an infected mother, Have a job that exposes you to human blood, Travel to regions with high infection rates of HBV, such as Asia, the Pacific Islands, Africa and Eastern Europe.
Having a chronic HBV infection can lead to serious complications, such as:
Scarring of the liver (cirrhosis). The inflammation associated with a hepatitis B infection can lead to extensive liver scarring (cirrhosis), which may impair the liver's ability to function.
Liver cancer. People with chronic hepatitis B infection have an increased risk of liver cancer.
Liver failure. Acute liver failure is a condition in which the vital functions of the liver shut down. When that occurs, a liver transplant is necessary to sustain life.
Other conditions. People with chronic hepatitis B may develop kidney disease or inflammation of blood vessels.
Long-term infection with the hepatitis C virus is known as chronic hepatitis C. Chronic hepatitis C is usually a "silent" infection for many years, until the virus damages the liver enough to cause the signs and symptoms of liver disease.
Signs and symptoms include: Bleeding easily, Bruising easily, Fatigue, Poor appetite, Yellow discoloration of the skin and eyes (jaundice), Dark-colored urine, Itchy skin, Fluid buildup in your abdomen (ascites), Swelling in your legs, Weight loss, Confusion, drowsiness and slurred speech (hepatic encephalopathy), Spiderlike blood vessels on your skin (spider angiomas).
Every chronic hepatitis C infection starts with an acute phase. Acute hepatitis C usually goes undiagnosed because it rarely causes symptoms. When signs and symptoms are present, they may include jaundice, along with fatigue, nausea, fever and muscle aches. Acute symptoms appear one to three months after exposure to the virus and last two weeks to three months.
Acute hepatitis C infection doesn't always become chronic. Some people clear HCV from their bodies after the acute phase, an outcome known as spontaneous viral clearance. In studies of people diagnosed with acute HCV, rates of spontaneous viral clearance have varied from 15% to 25%. Acute hepatitis C also responds well to antiviral therapy.
Hepatitis C infection is caused by the hepatitis C virus (HCV). The infection spreads when blood contaminated with the virus enters the bloodstream of an uninfected person.
Globally, HCV exists in several distinct forms, known as genotypes. Seven distinct HCV genotypes and more than 67 subtypes have been identified. The most common HCV genotype in the United States is type 1.
Although chronic hepatitis C follows a similar course regardless of the genotype of the infecting virus, treatment recommendations vary depending on viral genotype.
Your risk of hepatitis C infection is increased if you: Are a health care worker who has been exposed to infected blood, which may happen if an infected needle pierces your skin, Have ever injected or inhaled illicit drugs, Have HIV, Received a piercing or tattoo in an unclean environment using unsterile equipment, Received a blood transfusion or organ transplant before 1992, Received clotting factor concentrates before 1987, Received hemodialysis treatments for a long period of time, Were born to a woman with a hepatitis C infection, Were ever in prison, Were born between 1945 and 1965, the age group with the highest incidence of hepatitis C infection.
Hepatitis C infection that continues over many years can cause significant complications, such as:
Scarring of the liver (cirrhosis). After decades of hepatitis C infection, cirrhosis may occur. Scarring in your liver makes it difficult for your liver to function.
Liver cancer. A small number of people with hepatitis C infection may develop liver cancer.
Liver failure. Advanced cirrhosis may cause your liver to stop functioning.
Most people with hepatopulmonary syndrome have no symptoms. If symptoms occur, they may include: Shortness of breath, especially when sitting or standing, Clubbing of the fingers, in which the fingertips spread out and become rounder than normal, Broken blood vessels under the skin (spider angioma), Bluish tinge of the lips and skin (cyanosis).
Hepatopulmonary syndrome is caused when blood vessels in and around the lungs widen (dilate), which affects the amount of oxygen that moves from the lungs into the bloodstream. What causes this abnormality remains unclear, and it's unknown why some people with liver disease develop hepatopulmonary syndrome while others do not.
Signs and symptoms of HHT include: Nosebleeds, sometimes on a daily basis and often starting in childhood, Lacy red vessels or tiny red spots, particularly on the lips, face, fingertips, tongue and inside surfaces of the mouth, Iron deficiency anemia, Shortness of breath, Headaches, Seizures.
Most herniated disks occur in the lower back, although they can also occur in the neck. Signs and symptoms depend on where the disk is situated and whether the disk is pressing on a nerve. They usually affect one side of the body.
Arm or leg pain. If your herniated disk is in your lower back, you'll typically feel the most pain in your buttocks, thigh and calf. You might have pain in part of the foot, as well. If your herniated disk is in your neck, you'll typically feel the most pain in your shoulder and arm. This pain might shoot into your arm or leg when you cough, sneeze or move into certain positions. Pain is often described as sharp or burning.
Numbness or tingling. People who have a herniated disk often have radiating numbness or tingling in the body part served by the affected nerves.
Weakness. Muscles served by the affected nerves tend to weaken. This can cause you to stumble, or affect your ability to lift or hold items.
You can have a herniated disk without symptoms. You might not know you have it unless it shows up on a spinal image.
Seek medical attention if your neck or back pain travels down your arm or leg, or if you also have numbness, tingling or weakness.
Disk herniation is most often the result of a gradual, aging-related wear and tear called disk degeneration. As you age, your disks become less flexible and more prone to tearing or rupturing with even a minor strain or twist.
Most people can't pinpoint the cause of their herniated disk. Sometimes, using your back muscles instead of your leg and thigh muscles to lift heavy objects can lead to a herniated disk, as can twisting and turning while lifting. Rarely, a traumatic event such as a fall or a blow to the back is the cause.
Factors that can increase your risk of a herniated disk include:
Weight. Excess body weight causes extra stress on the disks in your lower back.
Occupation. People with physically demanding jobs have a greater risk of back problems. Repetitive lifting, pulling, pushing, bending sideways and twisting also can increase your risk of a herniated disk.
Genetics. Some people inherit a predisposition to developing a herniated disk.
Smoking. It's thought that smoking lessens the oxygen supply to the disk, causing it to break down more quickly.
Just above your waist, your spinal cord ends. What continues through the spinal canal is a group of long nerve roots that resemble a horse's tail (cauda equina).
Rarely, disk herniation can compress the entire spinal canal, including all the nerves of the cauda equina. Rarely, emergency surgery might be required to avoid permanent weakness or paralysis.
Seek emergency medical attention if you have:
Worsening symptoms. Pain, numbness or weakness can increase to the point that they hamper your daily activities.
Bladder or bowel dysfunction. Cauda equina syndrome can cause incontinence or difficulty urinating even with a full bladder.
Saddle anesthesia. This progressive loss of sensation affects the areas that would touch a saddle — the inner thighs, back of legs and the area around the rectum.
Most small hiatal hernias cause no signs or symptoms. But larger hiatal hernias can cause: Heartburn, Regurgitation of food or liquids into the mouth, Backflow of stomach acid into the esophagus (acid reflux), Difficulty swallowing, Chest or abdominal pain, Shortness of breath, Vomiting of blood or passing of black stools, which may indicate gastrointestinal bleeding.
See your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
A hiatal hernia occurs when weakened muscle tissue allows your stomach to bulge up through your diaphragm. It's not always clear why this happens. But a hiatal hernia might be caused by: Age-related changes in your diaphragm, Injury to the area, for example, after trauma or certain types of surgery, Being born with an unusually large hiatus, Persistent and intense pressure on the surrounding muscles, such as while coughing, vomiting, straining during a bowel movement, exercising or lifting heavy objects.
Hiatal hernia is most common in people who are: Age 50 or older, Obese.
Hiccupping is a symptom. It may sometimes be accompanied by a slight tightening sensation in your chest, abdomen or throat.
Make an appointment to see your doctor if your hiccups last more than 48 hours or if they are so severe that they cause problems with eating, sleeping or breathing.
The most common triggers for hiccups that last less than 48 hours include: Drinking carbonated beverages, Drinking too much alcohol, Eating too much, Excitement or emotional stress, Sudden temperature changes, Swallowing air with chewing gum or sucking on candy.
Hiccups that last more than 48 hours may be caused by a variety of factors, which can be grouped into the following categories.
A cause of long-term hiccups is damage to or irritation of the vagus nerves or phrenic nerves, which serve the diaphragm muscle. Factors that may cause damage or irritation to these nerves include: A hair or something else in your ear touching your eardrum, A tumor, cyst or goiter in your neck, Gastroesophageal reflux, Sore throat or laryngitis.
A tumor or infection in your central nervous system or damage to your central nervous system as a result of trauma can disrupt your body's normal control of the hiccup reflex. Examples include: Encephalitis, Meningitis, Multiple sclerosis, Stroke, Traumatic brain injury, Tumors.
Long-term hiccups can be triggered by: Alcoholism, Anesthesia, Barbiturates, Diabetes, Electrolyte imbalance, Kidney disease, Steroids, Tranquilizers.
Men are much more likely to develop long-term hiccups than are women. Other factors that may increase your risk of hiccups include:
Mental or emotional issues. Anxiety, stress and excitement have been associated with some cases of short-term and long-term hiccups.
Surgery. Some people develop hiccups after undergoing general anesthesia or after procedures that involve abdominal organs.
Prolonged hiccups may interfere with: Eating, Sleeping, Speech, Wound healing after surgery.
Hidradenitis suppurativa can affect one spot or multiple areas of the body. Signs and symptoms of the condition include:
Blackheads. Small pitted areas of skin containing blackheads — often appearing in pairs or a "double-barreled" pattern — are a common feature.
Painful pea-sized lumps. The condition usually starts with a single, painful lump under the skin that persists for weeks or months. Later more bumps form. They usually appear in areas with hair follicles with many oil and sweat glands, such as the armpits, groin and anal area. They also occur where skin rubs together, such as the inner thighs, breast and buttocks.
Tunnels. Over time, tracts connecting the lumps may form under the skin. These wounds heal very slowly, if at all, and can leak pus, which may have an odor.
Some people with this condition experience only mild symptoms. Excess weight, stress, hormonal changes, heat or humidity may worsen symptoms. In women, the disease severity may lessen after menopause.
Early detection of hidradenitis suppurativa is key to getting effective treatment. See your doctor if your condition: Is painful, Doesn't improve in a few weeks, Returns within weeks of treatment, Appears in several locations, Flares often.
If you've already received a diagnosis of hidradenitis suppurativa, keep in mind that the warning signs of a disease flare are often similar to those that occurred originally. Also pay attention to any new signs or symptoms. These may indicate either a flare or a complication of treatment.
You may need to see a specialist in skin conditions (dermatologist) or a surgeon for long-term care.
The exact cause of hidradenitis suppurativa isn't known. It develops when hair follicles in the skin become blocked. Experts think it could be connected to hormones, inherited genes and immune system problems. Smoking, excess weight and metabolic syndrome also might play a role.
Hidradenitis suppurativa is not caused by an infection or being unclean, and it can't be spread to other people.
Factors that increase your chance of developing hidradenitis suppurativa include:
Age. Hidradenitis suppurativa most commonly occurs in women between the ages of 18 and 29. People who develop the condition at an early age may be at increased risk of developing more widespread disease.
Your sex. Women are more likely to develop hidradenitis suppurativa than are men.
Family history. A tendency to develop hidradenitis suppurativa can be inherited.
Obesity. Several studies have shown a relationship between being overweight and hidradenitis suppurativa.
Smoking. Smoking tobacco has been linked to hidradenitis suppurativa.
Persistent and severe hidradenitis suppurativa often causes complications, including:
Infection. The affected area is susceptible to infection.
Scars and skin changes. The wounds may heal but leave rope-like scars or pitted skin.
Restricted movement. Sores and scar tissue may cause limited or painful movement, especially when the disease affects the armpits or thighs.
Obstructed lymph drainage. The most common sites for hidradenitis suppurativa also contain many lymph nodes. Scar tissue can interfere with the lymph drainage system, which may result in swelling in the arms, legs or genitals.
Social isolation. The location, drainage and odor of the sores can cause embarrassment and reluctance to go out in public, leading to sadness or depression.
Most people with high blood pressure have no signs or symptoms, even if blood pressure readings reach dangerously high levels.
A few people with high blood pressure may have headaches, shortness of breath or nosebleeds, but these signs and symptoms aren't specific and usually don't occur until high blood pressure has reached a severe or life-threatening stage.
You'll likely have your blood pressure taken as part of a routine doctor's appointment.
Ask your doctor for a blood pressure reading at least every two years starting at age 18. If you're age 40 or older, or you're 18 to 39 with a high risk of high blood pressure, ask your doctor for a blood pressure reading every year.
Blood pressure generally should be checked in both arms to determine if there's a difference. It's important to use an appropriate-sized arm cuff.
Your doctor will likely recommend more frequent readings if you've already been diagnosed with high blood pressure or have other risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Children age 3 and older will usually have blood pressure measured as a part of their yearly checkups.
If you don't regularly see your doctor, you may be able to get a free blood pressure screening at a health resource fair or other locations in your community. You can also find machines in some stores that will measure your blood pressure for free.
Public blood pressure machines, such as those found in pharmacies, may provide helpful information about your blood pressure, but they may have some limitations. The accuracy of these machines depends on several factors, such as a correct cuff size and proper use of the machines. Ask your doctor for advice on using public blood pressure machines.
There are two types of high blood pressure.
For most adults, there's no identifiable cause of high blood pressure. This type of high blood pressure, called primary (essential) hypertension, tends to develop gradually over many years.
Some people have high blood pressure caused by an underlying condition. This type of high blood pressure, called secondary hypertension, tends to appear suddenly and cause higher blood pressure than does primary hypertension. Various conditions and medications can lead to secondary hypertension, including: Obstructive sleep apnea, Kidney problems, Adrenal gland tumors, Thyroid problems, Certain defects you're born with (congenital) in blood vessels, Certain medications, such as birth control pills, cold remedies, decongestants, over-the-counter pain relievers and some prescription drugs, Illegal drugs, such as cocaine and amphetamines.
High blood pressure has many risk factors, including:
Age. The risk of high blood pressure increases as you age. Until about age 64, high blood pressure is more common in men. Women are more likely to develop high blood pressure after age 65.
Race. High blood pressure is particularly common among people of African heritage, often developing at an earlier age than it does in whites. Serious complications, such as stroke, heart attack and kidney failure, also are more common in people of African heritage.
Family history. High blood pressure tends to run in families.
Being overweight or obese. The more you weigh the more blood you need to supply oxygen and nutrients to your tissues. As the volume of blood circulated through your blood vessels increases, so does the pressure on your artery walls.
Not being physically active. People who are inactive tend to have higher heart rates. The higher your heart rate, the harder your heart must work with each contraction and the stronger the force on your arteries. Lack of physical activity also increases the risk of being overweight.
Using tobacco. Not only does smoking or chewing tobacco immediately raise your blood pressure temporarily, but the chemicals in tobacco can damage the lining of your artery walls. This can cause your arteries to narrow and increase your risk of heart disease. Secondhand smoke also can increase your heart disease risk.
Too much salt (sodium) in your diet. Too much sodium in your diet can cause your body to retain fluid, which increases blood pressure.
Too little potassium in your diet. Potassium helps balance the amount of sodium in your cells. If you don't get enough potassium in your diet or retain enough potassium, you may accumulate too much sodium in your blood.
Drinking too much alcohol. Over time, heavy drinking can damage your heart. Having more than one drink a day for women and more than two drinks a day for men may affect your blood pressure.
If you drink alcohol, do so in moderation. For healthy adults, that means up to one drink a day for women and two drinks a day for men. One drink equals 12 ounces of beer, 5 ounces of wine or 1.5 ounces of 80-proof liquor.
Stress. High levels of stress can lead to a temporary increase in blood pressure. If you try to relax by eating more, using tobacco or drinking alcohol, you may only increase problems with high blood pressure.
Certain chronic conditions. Certain chronic conditions also may increase your risk of high blood pressure, such as kidney disease, diabetes and sleep apnea.
Sometimes pregnancy contributes to high blood pressure, as well.
Although high blood pressure is most common in adults, children may be at risk, too. For some children, high blood pressure is caused by problems with the kidneys or heart. But for a growing number of kids, poor lifestyle habits, such as an unhealthy diet, obesity and lack of exercise, contribute to high blood pressure.
The excessive pressure on your artery walls caused by high blood pressure can damage your blood vessels, as well as organs in your body. The higher your blood pressure and the longer it goes uncontrolled, the greater the damage.
Uncontrolled high blood pressure can lead to complications including:
Heart attack or stroke. High blood pressure can cause hardening and thickening of the arteries (atherosclerosis), which can lead to a heart attack, stroke or other complications.
Aneurysm. Increased blood pressure can cause your blood vessels to weaken and bulge, forming an aneurysm. If an aneurysm ruptures, it can be life-threatening.
Heart failure. To pump blood against the higher pressure in your vessels, the heart has to work harder. This causes the walls of the heart's pumping chamber to thicken (left ventricular hypertrophy). Eventually, the thickened muscle may have a hard time pumping enough blood to meet your body's needs, which can lead to heart failure.
Weakened and narrowed blood vessels in your kidneys. This can prevent these organs from functioning normally.
Thickened, narrowed or torn blood vessels in the eyes. This can result in vision loss.
Metabolic syndrome. This syndrome is a cluster of disorders of your body's metabolism, including increased waist circumference; high triglycerides; low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, the "good" cholesterol; high blood pressure and high insulin levels. These conditions make you more likely to develop diabetes, heart disease and stroke.
Trouble with memory or understanding. Uncontrolled high blood pressure may also affect your ability to think, remember and learn. Trouble with memory or understanding concepts is more common in people with high blood pressure.
Dementia. Narrowed or blocked arteries can limit blood flow to the brain, leading to a certain type of dementia (vascular dementia). A stroke that interrupts blood flow to the brain also can cause vascular dementia.
High blood pressure usually doesn't cause symptoms. However, signs and symptoms that might indicate a high blood pressure emergency (hypertensive crisis) include: Headaches, Seizures, Vomiting, Chest pains, Fast, pounding, or fluttering heart beat (palpitations), Shortness of breath.
If your child has any of these symptoms, seek emergency medical care.
Your child's blood pressure should be checked during routine well-check appointments starting at age 3, and at every appointment if your child is found to have high blood pressure.
If your child has a condition that can increase the risk of high blood pressure — including premature birth, low birth weight, congenital heart disease and certain kidney problems — blood pressure checks might begin in infancy.
If you're concerned about your child having a risk factor for high blood pressure, such as being overweight or obese, talk to your child's doctor.
High blood pressure in younger children is often related to other health conditions such as heart defects, kidney disease, genetic conditions or hormonal disorders. Older children — especially those who are overweight — are more likely to have primary hypertension. This type occurs on its own, without an underlying condition.
Your child's risk factors for high blood pressure depend on health conditions, genetics and lifestyle factors.
Primary hypertension occurs on its own, without an identifiable cause. This type of high blood pressure occurs more often in older children, generally age 6 and older. The risk factors for developing primary hypertension include: Being overweight or obese, Having a family history of high blood pressure, Having type 2 diabetes or a high fasting blood sugar level, Having high cholesterol, Eating too much salt, Being black or Hispanic, Being male, Smoking or exposure to second-hand smoke, Being sedentary.
Secondary hypertension is caused by another condition. It's more common in young children. Other causes of high blood pressure include: Chronic kidney disease, Polycystic kidney disease, Heart problems, such as severe narrowing (coarctation) of the aorta, Adrenal disorders, Hyperthyroidism, Pheochromocytoma, a rare tumor in the adrenal gland, Narrowing of the artery to the kidney (renal artery stenosis), Sleep disorders, especially obstructive sleep apnea, Certain medications, such as decongestants, oral contraceptives and steroids, Drugs, such as cocaine.
Children who have high blood pressure are likely to continue to have high blood pressure as adults unless they begin treatment.
If your child's high blood pressure continues into adulthood, your child could be at risk of: Stroke, Heart attack, Heart failure, Kidney disease.
High cholesterol has no symptoms. A blood test is the only way to detect if you have it.
Ask your doctor if you should have a cholesterol test. Children and young adults with no risk factors for heart disease are usually tested once between the ages of 9 and 11 and again between the ages of 17 and 19. Retesting for adults with no risk factors for heart disease is usually done every five years.
If your test results aren't within desirable ranges, your doctor might recommend more-frequent measurements. Your doctor might also suggest more-frequent tests if you have a family history of high cholesterol, heart disease or other risk factors, such as smoking, diabetes or high blood pressure.
Cholesterol is carried through your blood, attached to proteins. This combination of proteins and cholesterol is called a lipoprotein. There are different types of cholesterol, based on what the lipoprotein carries. They are:
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL). LDL, or "bad" cholesterol, transports cholesterol particles throughout your body. LDL cholesterol builds up in the walls of your arteries, making them hard and narrow.
High-density lipoprotein (HDL). HDL, or "good" cholesterol, picks up excess cholesterol and takes it back to your liver.
A lipid profile also typically measures triglycerides, a type of fat in the blood. Having a high triglyceride level can also increase your risk of heart disease.
Factors you can control — such as inactivity, obesity and an unhealthy diet — contribute to high cholesterol and low HDL cholesterol. Factors beyond your control might play a role, too. For example, your genetic makeup might keep cells from removing LDL cholesterol from your blood efficiently or cause your liver to produce too much cholesterol.
Factors that can increase your risk of bad cholesterol include:
Poor diet. Eating saturated fat, found in animal products, and trans fats, found in some commercially baked cookies and crackers and microwave popcorn, can raise your cholesterol level. Foods that are high in cholesterol, such as red meat and full-fat dairy products, will also increase your cholesterol.
Obesity. Having a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or greater puts you at risk of high cholesterol.
Lack of exercise. Exercise helps boost your body's HDL, or "good," cholesterol while increasing the size of the particles that make up your LDL, or "bad," cholesterol, which makes it less harmful.
Smoking. Cigarette smoking damages the walls of your blood vessels, making them more prone to accumulate fatty deposits. Smoking might also lower your level of HDL, or "good," cholesterol.
Age. Because your body's chemistry changes as you age, your risk of high cholesterol climbs. For instance, as you age, your liver becomes less able to remove LDL cholesterol.
Diabetes. High blood sugar contributes to higher levels of a dangerous cholesterol called very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) and lower HDL cholesterol. High blood sugar also damages the lining of your arteries.
High cholesterol can cause a dangerous accumulation of cholesterol and other deposits on the walls of your arteries (atherosclerosis). These deposits (plaques) can reduce blood flow through your arteries, which can cause complications, such as:
Chest pain. If the arteries that supply your heart with blood (coronary arteries) are affected, you might have chest pain (angina) and other symptoms of coronary artery disease.
Heart attack. If plaques tear or rupture, a blood clot can form at the plaque-rupture site — blocking the flow of blood or breaking free and plugging an artery downstream. If blood flow to part of your heart stops, you'll have a heart attack.
Stroke. Similar to a heart attack, a stroke occurs when a blood clot blocks blood flow to part of your brain.
Signs and symptoms vary by age group. In infants, you might notice that one leg is longer than the other. Once a child begins walking, a limp may develop. During diaper changes, one hip may be less flexible than the other.
In teenagers and young adults, hip dysplasia can cause painful complications such as osteoarthritis or a hip labral tear. This may cause activity-related groin pain. In some cases, you might experience a sensation of instability in the hip.
At birth, the hip joint is made of soft cartilage that gradually hardens into bone. The ball and socket need to fit together well because they act as molds for each other. If the ball isn't seated firmly into the socket, the socket will not fully form around the ball and will become too shallow.
During the final month before birth, the space within the womb can become so crowded that the ball of the hip joint moves out of its proper position, which results in a shallower socket. Factors that may reduce the amount of space in the womb include: First pregnancy, Large baby, Breech presentation.
Hip dysplasia tends to run in families and is more common in girls. The risk of hip dysplasia is also higher in babies born in the breech position and in babies who are swaddled tightly with the hips and knees straight.
Later in life, hip dysplasia can damage the soft cartilage (labrum) that rims the socket portion of the hip joint. This is called a hip labral tear. Hip dysplasia can also make the joint more likely to develop osteoarthritis. This occurs because of higher contact pressures over a smaller surface of the socket. Over time, this wears away the smooth cartilage on the bones that helps them glide against each other as the joint moves.
Signs and symptoms of a hip fracture include: Inability to get up from a fall or to walk, Severe pain in your hip or groin, Inability to put weight on your leg on the side of your injured hip, Bruising and swelling in and around your hip area, Shorter leg on the side of your injured hip, Outward turning of your leg on the side of your injured hip.
A severe impact — in a car crash, for example — can cause hip fractures in people of all ages. In older adults, a hip fracture is most often a result of a fall from a standing height. In people with very weak bones, a hip fracture can occur simply by standing on the leg and twisting.
The rate of hip fractures increases substantially with:
Age. Bone density and muscle mass tend to decrease with age. Older people can also have problems with vision and balance, which can increase the risk of falling.
Your sex. Hip fractures occur in women about three times more often than they do in men. Women lose bone density faster than men do, in part because the drop in estrogen levels that occurs with menopause accelerates bone loss. However, men also can develop dangerously low levels of bone density.
Osteoporosis. If you have this condition, which causes bones to weaken, you're at increased risk of fractures.
Other chronic medical conditions. Endocrine disorders, such as an overactive thyroid, can lead to fragile bones. Intestinal disorders, which can reduce your absorption of vitamin D and calcium, also can lead to weakened bones.
Medical conditions that affect the brain and nervous system, including cognitive impairment, dementia, Parkinson's disease, stroke and peripheral neuropathy, also increase the risk of falling.
Having low blood sugar and low blood pressure also can contribute to the risk of falls.
Certain medications. Cortisone medications, such as prednisone, can weaken bone if you take them long-term. Certain drugs or certain combinations of medications can make you dizzy and more prone to falling. Drugs that act on your central nervous system — such as sleep medications, antipsychotics and sedatives — are most commonly associated with falls.
Nutritional problems. Lack of calcium and vitamin D in your diet when you're young lowers your peak bone mass and increases your risk of fracture later in life. It's also important to get enough calcium and vitamin D in older age to try to maintain the bone you have. As you age, try to maintain a healthy weight. Being underweight increases the risk of bone loss.
Physical inactivity. Lack of regular weight-bearing exercise, such as walking, can result in weakened bones and muscles, making falls and fractures more likely.
Tobacco and alcohol use. Both can interfere with the normal processes of bone building and maintenance, resulting in bone loss.
A hip fracture can reduce your independence and sometimes shorten your life. About half the people who have a hip fractures aren't able to regain the ability to live independently.
If a hip fracture keeps you immobile for a long time, the complications can include: Blood clots in your legs or lungs, Bedsores, Urinary tract infections, Pneumonia, Further loss of muscle mass, increasing your risk of falls and injuries, Death.
Many hip labral tears cause no signs or symptoms. Some people, however, have one or more of the following: Pain in your hip or groin, often made worse by long periods of standing, sitting or walking, A locking, clicking or catching sensation in your hip joint, Stiffness or limited range of motion in your hip joint.
Seek medical attention if symptoms worsen or don't improve within six weeks.
The cause of a hip labral tear might be:
Trauma. Injury to or dislocation of the hip joint — which can occur during car accidents or from playing contact sports such as football or hockey — can cause a hip labral tear.
Structural abnormalities. Some people are born with hip problems that can accelerate wear and tear of the joint and eventually cause a hip labral tear.
Repetitive motions. Sports-related and other physical activities — including long-distance running and the sudden twisting or pivoting motions common in golf or softball — can lead to joint wear and tear that ultimately result in a hip labral tear.
A hip labral tear can make you more likely to develop osteoarthritis in that joint in the future.
Signs and symptoms of Hirschsprung's disease vary with the severity of the condition. Usually signs and symptoms appear shortly after birth, but sometimes they're not apparent until later in life.
Typically, the most obvious sign is a newborn's failure to have a bowel movement within 48 hours after birth.
Other signs and symptoms in newborns may include: Swollen belly, Vomiting, including vomiting a green or brown substance, Constipation or gas, which might make a newborn fussy, Diarrhea.
In older children, signs and symptoms can include: Swollen belly, Chronic constipation, Gas, Failure to thrive, Fatigue.
It's not clear what causes Hirschsprung's disease. It sometimes occurs in families and might, in some cases, be associated with a genetic mutation.
Hirschsprung's disease occurs when nerve cells in the colon don't form completely. Nerves in the colon control the muscle contractions that move food through the bowels. Without the contractions, stool stays in the large intestine.
Factors that may increase the risk of Hirschsprung's disease include:
Having a sibling who has Hirschsprung's disease. Hirschsprung's disease can be inherited. If you have one child who has the condition, future biological children could be at risk.
Being male. Hirschsprung's disease is more common in males.
Having other inherited conditions. Hirschsprung's disease is associated with certain inherited conditions, such as Down syndrome and other abnormalities present at birth, such as congenital heart disease.
Children who have Hirschsprung's disease are prone to a serious intestinal infection called enterocolitis. Enterocolitis can be life-threatening and requires immediate treatment.
Hirsutism is stiff or dark body hair, appearing on the body where women don't commonly have hair — primarily the face, chest, lower abdomen, inner thighs and back. People have widely varying opinions on what's considered excessive.
When high androgen levels cause hirsutism, other signs might develop over time, a process called virilization. Signs of virilization might include: Deepening voice, Balding, Acne, Decreased breast size, Increased muscle mass, Enlargement of the clitoris.
If you think you have too much coarse hair on your face or body, talk with your doctor about treatment options.
Excess facial or body hair is often a symptom of an underlying medical problem. See your doctor for assessment if over a few months you experience severe or rapid hair growth on your face or body or signs of virilization. You may be referred to a doctor who specializes in hormone disorders (endocrinologist) or skin problems (dermatologist).
Hirsutism may be caused by:
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). This condition, which often begins with puberty, causes an imbalance of sex hormones. Over years, PCOS may slowly result in excess hair growth, irregular periods, obesity, infertility and sometimes multiple cysts on the ovaries.
Cushing syndrome. This occurs when your body is exposed to high levels of the hormone cortisol. It can develop from your adrenal glands making too much cortisol or from taking medications such as prednisone over a long period.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia. This inherited condition is characterized by abnormal production of steroid hormones, including cortisol and androgen, by your adrenal glands.
Tumors. Rarely, an androgen-secreting tumor in the ovaries or adrenal glands can cause hirsutism.
Medications. Some medications can cause hirsutism. These include minoxidil (Minoxidil, Rogaine); danazol, which is used to treat women with endometriosis; testosterone (Androgel, Testim); and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). If your partner uses topical products containing androgens, you can be affected as well, through skin-to-skin contact.
Often hirsutism occurs with no identifiable cause.
Several factors can influence your likelihood of developing hirsutism, including:
Family history. Several conditions that cause hirsutism, including congenital adrenal hyperplasia and polycystic ovary syndrome, run in families.
Ancestry. Women of Mediterranean, Middle Eastern and South Asian ancestry are more likely to have more body hair with no identifiable cause than are other women.
Obesity. Being obese causes increased androgen production, which can worsen hirsutism.
Hirsutism can be emotionally distressing. Some women feel self-conscious about having unwanted hair. Some develop depression. Also, although hirsutism doesn't cause physical complications, the underlying cause of a hormonal imbalance can.
If you have hirsutism and irregular periods, you might have polycystic ovary syndrome, which can inhibit fertility. Women who take certain medications to treat hirsutism should avoid pregnancy because of the risk of birth defects.
The mildest forms of histoplasmosis cause no signs or symptoms, but severe infections can be life-threatening. When signs and symptoms occur, they usually appear three to 17 days after exposure and can include: Fever, Chills, Headache, Muscle aches, Dry cough, Chest discomfort, Fatigue.
Some people with histoplasmosis also get joint pain and a rash. People who have a lung disease, such as emphysema, can develop a chronic form of histoplasmosis.
Signs of chronic histoplasmosis can include weight loss and a bloody cough. The symptoms of chronic histoplasmosis sometimes mimic those of tuberculosis.
The most severe variety of histoplasmosis occurs primarily in infants and in people with compromised immune systems. Called disseminated histoplasmosis, it can affect nearly any part of your body, including your mouth, liver, central nervous system, skin and adrenal glands. If untreated, disseminated histoplasmosis is usually fatal.
Contact your doctor if you develop flu-like symptoms after being exposed to bird or bat droppings — especially if you have a weakened immune system.
Histoplasmosis is caused by the reproductive cells (spores) of the fungus Histoplasma capsulatum. They float into the air when dirt or other material is disturbed.
The fungus thrives in damp soil that's rich in organic material, especially the droppings from birds and bats. It's particularly common in chicken and pigeon coops, old barns, caves, and parks.
Histoplasmosis isn't contagious, so it can't be spread from person to person. If you've had histoplasmosis, you can get it again. However, if you do get it again, the illness will likely be milder the second time.
The chances of developing histoplasmosis symptoms increase with the number of spores you inhale. People more likely to be exposed include: Farmers, Pest control workers, Poultry keepers, Construction workers, Roofers, Landscapers and gardeners, Cave explorers, Demolition workers.
Children younger than age 2 and adults age 55 and older have weaker immune systems, so they're more likely to develop disseminated histoplasmosis — the most serious form of the disease. Other factors that can weaken your immune system include: HIV or AIDS, Cancer chemotherapy, Corticosteroid drugs, such as prednisone, Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors, often used to control rheumatoid arthritis, Medications that prevent rejection of organ transplants.
Histoplasmosis can cause a number of serious complications, even in otherwise healthy people. For infants, older adults and people with compromised immune systems, the potential problems are often life-threatening.
Complications can include:
Acute respiratory distress syndrome. Histoplasmosis can damage lungs to the point that the air sacs begin filling with fluid. This prevents good air exchange and can deplete the oxygen in your blood.
Heart problems. Inflammation of the sac that surrounds your heart (pericardium) is called pericarditis. When the fluid in this sac increases, it can interfere with the heart's ability to pump blood.
Adrenal insufficiency. Histoplasmosis can harm your adrenal glands, which produce hormones that give instructions to virtually every organ and tissue in your body.
Meningitis. In some cases, histoplasmosis can cause this inflammation of the membranes surrounding your brain and spinal cord.
The welts associated with hives can be: Reddish, Itchy ranging from mild to intense, Round, oval or worm-shaped, As small as a pea or as large as a dinner plate.
Most hives appear quickly and go away within 24 hours. Chronic hives can last for months or years.
Angioedema is a reaction similar to hives that affects deeper layers of your skin. It can appear with hives or alone. Signs and symptoms include: Welts that form in minutes to hours, Swelling and redness, especially around the eyes, cheeks or lips, Pain or warmth in the affected areas.
You can usually treat mild cases of hives or angioedema at home. See your doctor if your symptoms continue for more than a few days.
If you think your hives or angioedema were caused by a known allergy to food or a medication, your symptoms may be an early sign of an anaphylactic reaction. Seek emergency care if you feel your tongue, lips, mouth or throat is swelling or if you're having trouble breathing.
Hives and angioedema can be caused by:
Foods. Many foods can trigger reactions in people with sensitivities. Shellfish, fish, peanuts, tree nuts, soy, wheat, eggs and milk are frequent offenders.
Medications. Many medications may cause hives or angioedema. Common culprits include penicillin, aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen sodium (Aleve) and blood pressure medications.
Airborne allergens. Pollen and other allergens that you breathe in can trigger hives, sometimes accompanied by upper and lower respiratory tract symptoms.
Environmental factors. Examples include sunlight, vibration such as from using a lawn mower, hot showers or baths, pressure on the skin such as from tight clothing or scratching, emotional stress, insect bites and exercise.
Medical treatments or underlying conditions. Hives and angioedema also occasionally occur in response to blood transfusions and infections with bacteria or viruses such as hepatitis and HIV.
Oftentimes, no specific cause can be identified, especially in the case of chronic hives.
Hives and angioedema are common. You may be at increased risk of hives and angioedema if you: Have had hives or angioedema before, Have had other allergic reactions, Have a family history of hives, angioedema or hereditary angioedema.
Severe angioedema can be life-threatening if swelling causes your throat or tongue to block your airway.
The symptoms of HIV and AIDS vary, depending on the phase of infection.
Some people infected by HIV develop a flu-like illness within two to four weeks after the virus enters the body. This illness, known as primary (acute) HIV infection, may last for a few weeks. Possible signs and symptoms include: Fever, Headache, Muscle aches and joint pain, Rash, Sore throat and painful mouth sores, Swollen lymph glands, mainly on the neck, Diarrhea, Weight loss, Cough, Night sweats.
These symptoms can be so mild that you might not even notice them. However, the amount of virus in your bloodstream (viral load) is quite high at this time. As a result, the infection spreads more easily during primary infection than during the next stage.
In this stage of infection, HIV is still present in the body and in white blood cells. However, many people may not have any symptoms or infections during this time.
This stage can last for many years if you're not receiving antiretroviral therapy (ART). Some people develop more severe disease much sooner.
As the virus continues to multiply and destroy your immune cells — the cells in your body that help fight off germs — you may develop mild infections or chronic signs and symptoms such as: Fever, Fatigue, Swollen lymph nodes — often one of the first signs of HIV infection, Diarrhea, Weight loss, Oral yeast infection (thrush), Shingles (herpes zoster), Pneumonia.
Thanks to better antiviral treatments, most people with HIV in the U.S. today don't develop AIDS. Untreated, HIV typically turns into AIDS in about 8 to 10 years.
When AIDS occurs, your immune system has been severely damaged. You'll be more likely to develop opportunistic infections or opportunistic cancers — diseases that wouldn't usually cause illness in a person with a healthy immune system.
The signs and symptoms of some of these infections may include: Sweats, Chills, Recurring fever, Chronic diarrhea, Swollen lymph glands, Persistent white spots or unusual lesions on your tongue or in your mouth, Persistent, unexplained fatigue, Weakness, Weight loss, Skin rashes or bumps.
If you think you may have been infected with HIV or are at risk of contracting the virus, see a doctor as soon as possible.
HIV is caused by a virus. It can spread through sexual contact or blood, or from mother to child during pregnancy, childbirth or breast-feeding.
HIV destroys CD4 T cells — white blood cells that play a large role in helping your body fight disease. The fewer CD4 T cells you have, the weaker your immune system becomes.
You can have an HIV infection, with few or no symptoms, for years before it turns into AIDS. AIDS is diagnosed when the CD4 T cell count falls below 200 or you have an AIDS-defining complication, such as a serious infection or cancer.
To become infected with HIV, infected blood, semen or vaginal secretions must enter your body. This can happen in several ways:
By having sex. You may become infected if you have vaginal, anal or oral sex with an infected partner whose blood, semen or vaginal secretions enter your body. The virus can enter your body through mouth sores or small tears that sometimes develop in the rectum or vagina during sexual activity.
By sharing needles. Sharing contaminated IV drug paraphernalia (needles and syringes) puts you at high risk of HIV and other infectious diseases, such as hepatitis.
From blood transfusions. In some cases, the virus may be transmitted through blood transfusions. American hospitals and blood banks now screen the blood supply for HIV antibodies, so this risk is very small.
During pregnancy or delivery or through breast-feeding. Infected mothers can pass the virus on to their babies. Mothers who are HIV-positive and get treatment for the infection during pregnancy can significantly lower the risk to their babies.
You can't become infected with HIV through ordinary contact. That means you can't catch HIV or AIDS by hugging, kissing, dancing or shaking hands with someone who has the infection.
HIV isn't spread through the air, water or insect bites.
Anyone of any age, race, sex or sexual orientation can be infected with HIV/AIDS. However, you're at greatest risk of HIV/AIDS if you:
Have unprotected sex. Use a new latex or polyurethane condom every time you have sex. Anal sex is more risky than is vaginal sex. Your risk of HIV increases if you have multiple sexual partners.
Have an STI. Many STIs produce open sores on your genitals. These sores act as doorways for HIV to enter your body.
Use IV drugs. People who use IV drugs often share needles and syringes. This exposes them to droplets of other people's blood.
HIV infection weakens your immune system, making you much more likely to develop many infections and certain types of cancers.
Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP). This fungal infection can cause severe illness. Although it's declined significantly with current treatments for HIV/AIDS, in the U.S. PCP is still the most common cause of pneumonia in people infected with HIV.
Candidiasis (thrush). Candidiasis is a common HIV-related infection. It causes inflammation and a thick, white coating on your mouth, tongue, esophagus or vagina.
Tuberculosis (TB). In resource-limited nations, TB is the most common opportunistic infection associated with HIV. It's a leading cause of death among people with AIDS.
Cytomegalovirus. This common herpes virus is transmitted in body fluids such as saliva, blood, urine, semen and breast milk. A healthy immune system inactivates the virus, and it remains dormant in your body. If your immune system weakens, the virus resurfaces — causing damage to your eyes, digestive tract, lungs or other organs.
Cryptococcal meningitis. Meningitis is an inflammation of the membranes and fluid surrounding your brain and spinal cord (meninges). Cryptococcal meningitis is a common central nervous system infection associated with HIV, caused by a fungus found in soil.
Toxoplasmosis. This potentially deadly infection is caused by Toxoplasma gondii, a parasite spread primarily by cats. Infected cats pass the parasites in their stools, which may then spread to other animals and humans. Toxoplasmosis can cause heart disease, and seizures occur when it spreads to the brain.
Lymphoma. This cancer starts in the white blood cells. The most common early sign is painless swelling of the lymph nodes in your neck, armpit or groin.
Kaposi's sarcoma. A tumor of the blood vessel walls, Kaposi's sarcoma usually appears as pink, red or purple lesions on the skin and mouth. In people with darker skin, the lesions may look dark brown or black. Kaposi's sarcoma can also affect the internal organs, including the digestive tract and lungs.
Wasting syndrome. Untreated HIV/AIDS can cause significant weight loss, often accompanied by diarrhea, chronic weakness and fever.
Neurological complications. HIV can cause neurological symptoms such as confusion, forgetfulness, depression, anxiety and difficulty walking. HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) can range from mild symptoms of behavioral changes and reduced mental functioning to severe dementia causing weakness and inability to function.
Kidney disease. HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is an inflammation of the tiny filters in your kidneys that remove excess fluid and wastes from your blood and pass them to your urine. It most often affects black or Hispanic people.
Liver disease. Liver disease is also a major complication, especially in people who also have hepatitis B or hepatitis C.
Getting and saving an excessive number of items, gradual buildup of clutter in living spaces and difficulty discarding things are usually the first signs and symptoms of hoarding disorder, which often surfaces during the teenage to early adult years.
As the person grows older, he or she typically starts acquiring things for which there is no immediate need or space. By middle age, symptoms are often severe and may be harder to treat.
Problems with hoarding gradually develop over time and tend to be a private behavior. Often, significant clutter has developed by the time it reaches the attention of others.
Signs and symptoms may include: Excessively acquiring items that are not needed or for which there's no space, Persistent difficulty throwing out or parting with your things, regardless of actual value, Feeling a need to save these items, and being upset by the thought of discarding them, Building up of clutter to the point where rooms become unusable, Having a tendency toward indecisiveness, perfectionism, avoidance, procrastination, and problems with planning and organizing.
Excessive acquiring and refusing to discard items results in: Disorganized piles or stacks of items, such as newspapers, clothes, paperwork, books or sentimental items, Possessions that crowd and clutter your walking spaces and living areas and make the space unusable for the intended purpose, such as not being able to cook in the kitchen or use the bathroom to bathe, Buildup of food or trash to unusually excessive, unsanitary levels, Significant distress or problems functioning or keeping yourself and others safe in your home, Conflict with others who try to reduce or remove clutter from your home, Difficulty organizing items, sometimes losing important items in the clutter.
People with hoarding disorder typically save items because: They believe these items are unique or will be needed at some point in the future, The items have important emotional significance — serving as a reminder of happier times or representing beloved people or pets, They feel safer when surrounded by the things they save, They don't want to waste anything.
Hoarding disorder is different from collecting. People who have collections, such as stamps or model cars, deliberately search out specific items, categorize them and carefully display their collections. Although collections can be large, they aren't usually cluttered and they don't cause the distress and impairments that are part of hoarding disorder.
People who hoard animals may collect dozens or even hundreds of pets. Animals may be confined inside or outside. Because of the large numbers, these animals often aren't cared for properly. The health and safety of the person and the animals are at risk because of unsanitary conditions.
If you or a loved one has symptoms of hoarding disorder, talk with a doctor or mental health professional as soon as possible. Some communities have agencies that help with hoarding problems. Check with the local or county government for resources in your area.
As hard as it might be, if your loved one's hoarding disorder threatens health or safety, you may need to contact local authorities, such as police, fire, public health, child or elder protective services, or animal welfare agencies.
It's not clear what causes hoarding disorder. Genetics, brain functioning and stressful life events are being studied as possible causes.
Hoarding usually starts around ages 11 to 15, and it tends to get worse with age. Hoarding is more common in older adults than in younger adults.
Risk factors include:
Personality. Many people who have hoarding disorder have a temperament that includes indecisiveness.
Family history. There is a strong association between having a family member who has hoarding disorder and having the disorder yourself.
Stressful life events. Some people develop hoarding disorder after experiencing a stressful life event that they had difficulty coping with, such as the death of a loved one, divorce, eviction or losing possessions in a fire.
Hoarding disorder can cause a variety of complications, including: Increased risk of falls, Injury or being trapped by shifting or falling items, Family conflicts, Loneliness and social isolation, Unsanitary conditions that pose a risk to health, A fire hazard, Poor work performance, Legal issues, such as eviction.
Many people with hoarding disorder also experience other mental health disorders, such as: Depression, Anxiety disorders, Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Signs and symptoms of Hodgkin's lymphoma may include: Painless swelling of lymph nodes in your neck, armpits or groin, Persistent fatigue, Fever, Night sweats, Unexplained weight loss, Severe itching, Increased sensitivity to the effects of alcohol or pain in your lymph nodes after drinking alcohol.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
Doctors aren't sure what causes Hodgkin's lymphoma. But it begins when an infection-fighting cell called a lymphocyte develops a genetic mutation. The mutation tells the cell to multiply rapidly, causing many diseased cells that continue multiplying.
The mutation causes a large number of oversized, abnormal lymphocytes to accumulate in the lymphatic system, where they crowd out healthy cells and cause the signs and symptoms of Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Various types of Hodgkin's lymphoma exist. Your diagnosis is based on the types of cells involved in your disease and their behavior. The type of lymphoma you are diagnosed with determines your treatment options.
Classical Hodgkin's lymphoma is the more common type of this disease. People diagnosed with this disease have large, abnormal cells called Reed-Sternberg cells in their lymph nodes.
Subtypes of classical Hodgkin's lymphoma include: Nodular sclerosis Hodgkin's lymphoma, Mixed cellularity Hodgkin's lymphoma, Lymphocyte-depleted Hodgkin's lymphoma, Lymphocyte-rich Hodgkin's lymphoma.
This much rarer type of Hodgkin's lymphoma involves large, abnormal cells that are sometimes called popcorn cells because of their appearance. Treatment may be different from the classical type. People with this type of Hodgkin's lymphoma may have a better chance of a cure when the disease is diagnosed at an early stage.
Factors that can increase the risk of Hodgkin's lymphoma include:
Your age. Hodgkin's lymphoma is most often diagnosed in people between 15 and 30 years old and those over 55.
A family history of lymphoma. Having a blood relative with Hodgkin's lymphoma or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma increases your risk of developing Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Being male. Males are slightly more likely to develop Hodgkin's lymphoma than are females.
Past Epstein-Barr infection. People who have had illnesses caused by the Epstein-Barr virus, such as infectious mononucleosis, are more likely to develop Hodgkin's lymphoma than are people who haven't had Epstein-Barr infections.
Horner syndrome usually affects only one side of the face. Common signs and symptoms include: A persistently small pupil (miosis), A notable difference in pupil size between the two eyes (anisocoria), Little or delayed opening (dilation) of the affected pupil in dim light, Drooping of the upper eyelid (ptosis), Slight elevation of the lower lid, sometimes called upside-down ptosis, Sunken appearance to the eye, Little or no sweating (anhidrosis) either on the entire side of the face or an isolated patch of skin on the affected side.
Signs and symptoms, particularly ptosis and anhidrosis, may be subtle and difficult to detect.
Additional signs and symptoms in children with Horner syndrome may include: Lighter iris color in the affected eye of a child under the age of 1, Lack of redness (flushing) on the affected side of the face that would normally appear from heat, physical exertion or emotional reactions.
A number of factors, some more serious than others, can cause Horner syndrome. It is important to get a prompt and accurate diagnosis.
Get emergency care if signs or symptoms associated with Horner syndrome appear suddenly, appear after a traumatic injury, or are accompanied by other signs or symptoms, such as: Impaired vision, Dizziness, Muscle weakness or lack of muscle control, Severe, sudden headache or neck pain.
Horner syndrome is caused by damage to a certain pathway in the sympathetic nervous system. The sympathetic nervous system regulates heart rate, pupil size, perspiration, blood pressure and other functions that enable you to respond quickly to changes in your environment.
The nerve pathway affected in Horner syndrome is divided into three groups of nerve cells (neurons).
This neuron pathway leads from the hypothalamus at the base of the brain, passes through the brainstem and extends into the upper portion of the spinal cord. Problems in this region that can disrupt nerve function related to Horner syndrome include: Stroke, Tumor, Diseases that cause the loss of the protective sheath on neurons (myelin), Neck trauma, Cyst or cavity in the spinal column (syringomyelia).
This neuron path extends from the spinal column, across the upper part of the chest and into the side of the neck. Causes related to nerve damage in this region may include: Lung cancer, Tumor of the myelin sheath (schwannoma), Damage to the main blood vessel leading from the heart (aorta), Surgery in the chest cavity, Traumatic injury.
This neuron path extends along the side of the neck and leads to the facial skin and muscles of the iris and eyelids. Nerve damage in this region may be associated with the following: Damage to the carotid artery along the side of the neck, Damage to the jugular vein along the side of the neck, Tumor or infection near the base of the skull, Migraines, Cluster headaches, a disorder that results in cylical patterns of severe headaches.
The most common causes of Horner syndrome in children include: Injury to the neck or shoulders during delivery, Defect of the aorta present at birth, Tumor of the hormonal and nervous systems (neuroblastoma).
In some cases the cause of Horner syndrome cannot be identified. This is known as idiopathic Horner syndrome.
During a hot flash, you might have: A sudden feeling of warmth spreading through your chest, neck and face, A flushed appearance with red, blotchy skin, Rapid heartbeat, Perspiration, mostly on your upper body, A chilled feeling as the hot flash lets up, Feelings of anxiety.
The frequency and intensity of hot flashes vary among women. Hot flashes may be mild or so intense that they disrupt daily activities. They can happen at any time of day or night. Nighttime hot flashes (night sweats) may wake you from sleep and can cause long-term sleep disruptions.
How often hot flashes occur varies among women, but most women who report having hot flashes experience them daily. On average, hot flash symptoms persist for more than seven years. Some women have them for more than 10 years.
If hot flashes affect your daily activities or nighttime sleep, consider seeing your doctor to discuss treatment options.
Hot flashes are most commonly caused by changing hormone levels before, during and after menopause. It's not clear exactly how hormonal changes cause hot flashes. But most research suggests that hot flashes occur when decreased estrogen levels cause your body's thermostat (hypothalamus) to become more sensitive to slight changes in body temperature. When the hypothalamus thinks your body is too warm, it starts a chain of events — a hot flash — to cool you down.
Rarely, hot flashes and nights sweats are caused by something other than menopause. Other potential causes include medication side effects, problems with your thyroid, certain cancers and side effects of cancer treatment.
Not all women who go through menopause have hot flashes, and it's not clear why some women do have them. Factors that may increase your risk include:
Smoking. Women who smoke are more likely to get hot flashes.
Obesity. A high body mass index (BMI) is associated with a higher frequency of hot flashes.
Race. More black women report having hot flashes during menopause than do women of other races. Hot flashes are reported least frequently in Asian women.
Hot flashes may impact your daily activities and quality of life. Nighttime hot flashes (night sweats) can wake you from sleep and, over time, can cause long-term sleep disruptions.
Research suggests that women who have hot flashes may have an increased risk of heart disease and greater bone loss than women who do not have hot flashes.
In most cases, your body's immune system defeats an HPV infection before it creates warts. When warts do appear, they vary in appearance depending on which kind of HPV is involved:
Genital warts. These appear as flat lesions, small cauliflower-like bumps or tiny stemlike protrusions. In women, genital warts appear mostly on the vulva but can also occur near the anus, on the cervix or in the vagina.
In men, genital warts appear on the penis and scrotum or around the anus. Genital warts rarely cause discomfort or pain, though they may itch or feel tender.
Common warts. Common warts appear as rough, raised bumps and usually occur on the hands and fingers. In most cases, common warts are simply unsightly, but they can also be painful or susceptible to injury or bleeding.
Plantar warts. Plantar warts are hard, grainy growths that usually appear on the heels or balls of your feet. These warts might cause discomfort.
Flat warts. Flat warts are flat-topped, slightly raised lesions. They can appear anywhere, but children usually get them on the face and men tend to get them in the beard area. Women tend to get them on the legs.
Nearly all cervical cancers are caused by HPV infections, but cervical cancer may take 20 years or longer to develop after an HPV infection. The HPV infection and early cervical cancer typically don't cause noticeable symptoms. Getting vaccinated against HPV infection is your best protection from cervical cancer.
Because early cervical cancer doesn't cause symptoms, it's vital that women have regular screening tests to detect any precancerous changes in the cervix that might lead to cancer. Current guidelines recommend that women ages 21 to 29 have a Pap test every three years.
Women ages 30 to 65 are advised to continue having a Pap test every three years, or every five years if they also get the HPV DNA test at the same time. Women over 65 can stop testing if they've had three normal Pap tests in a row, or two HPV DNA and Pap tests with no abnormal results.
If you or your child has warts of any kind that cause embarrassment, discomfort or pain, seek advice from your doctor.
HPV infection occurs when the virus enters your body, usually through a cut, abrasion or small tear in your skin. The virus is transferred primarily by skin-to-skin contact.
Genital HPV infections are contracted through sexual intercourse, anal sex and other skin-to-skin contact in the genital region. Some HPV infections that result in oral or upper respiratory lesions are contracted through oral sex.
If you're pregnant and have an HPV infection with genital warts, it's possible your baby may get the infection. Rarely, the infection may cause a noncancerous growth in the baby's voice box (larynx).
Warts are contagious. They can spread through direct contact with a wart. Warts can also spread when someone touches something that already touched a wart.
HPV infections are common. Risk factors for HPV infection include:
Number of sexual partners. The more sexual partners you have, the more likely you are to contract a genital HPV infection. Having sex with a partner who has had multiple sex partners also increases your risk.
Age. Common warts occur mostly in children. Genital warts occur most often in adolescents and young adults.
Weakened immune systems. People who have weakened immune systems are at greater risk of HPV infections. Immune systems can be weakened by HIV/AIDS or by immune system-suppressing drugs used after organ transplants.
Damaged skin. Areas of skin that have been punctured or opened are more prone to develop common warts.
Personal contact. Touching someone's warts or not wearing protection before contacting surfaces that have been exposed to HPV — such as public showers or swimming pools — might increase your risk of HPV infection.
Oral and upper respiratory lesions. Some HPV infections cause lesions on your tongue, tonsils, soft palate, or within your larynx and nose.
Cancer. Certain strains of HPV can cause cervical cancer. These strains might also contribute to cancers of the genitals, anus, mouth and upper respiratory tract.
Hunter syndrome symptoms vary and range from mild to severe. Symptoms aren't present at birth, but often begin around ages 2 to 4 as the harmful molecules build up.
Signs and symptoms may include: An enlarged head, Thickening of the lips, A broad nose and flared nostrils, A protruding tongue, A deep, hoarse voice, Abnormal bone size or shape and other skeletal irregularities, A distended abdomen, as a result of enlarged internal organs, Chronic diarrhea, White skin growths that resemble pebbles, Joint stiffness, Aggressive behavior, Stunted growth, Delayed development, such as late walking or talking.
Hunter syndrome is very uncommon, but if you notice changes in your child's facial appearance, a loss of previously acquired skills, or other signs or symptoms listed above, talk to your child's primary care doctor. He or she can help you decide if you need to see a specialist or seek further testing.
Hunter syndrome develops when a defective chromosome is inherited from the child's mother.
Because of that defective chromosome, an enzyme that's needed to break down complex sugar molecules is missing or malfunctioning. Without this enzyme, massive amounts of these complex sugar molecules collect in the cells, blood and connective tissues, causing permanent and progressive damage.
There are two major risk factors for developing Hunter syndrome:
Family history. Hunter syndrome is caused by a defective chromosome, and a child must inherit the defective chromosome to develop the disease. Hunter syndrome is what's known as an X-linked recessive disease, which means that women carry the defective disease-causing X chromosome and can pass it on. But mothers aren't affected by the disease themselves and likely don't know that they have this defective chromosome.
Sex. Hunter syndrome nearly always occurs in males. Girls are far less at risk of developing this disease because they inherit two X chromosomes. If one of the X chromosomes is defective, their normal X chromosome can provide a functioning gene. If the X chromosome of a male is defective, however, there isn't another normal X chromosome to compensate for the problem.
A variety of complications can occur with Hunter syndrome depending on the type and severity of the disease. Complications can affect the lungs, heart, joints, connective tissue, and brain and nervous system.
An enlarged tongue, thickened gums, and thickening of the nasal passages and windpipe (trachea) make breathing difficult. Children often have chronic ear and sinus infections, respiratory infections, and pneumonia.
Sleep apnea, a condition in which breathing is intermittently interrupted during sleep, is often present because of airway constriction.
Thickening of heart tissue can cause improper closing of heart valves. As a result, the heart and other parts of the body don't receive blood efficiently. As the disease progresses, these conditions often become worse and typically result in heart failure.
The thickening of tissue can also cause narrowing of the aorta and other blood vessels. This in turn can result in high blood pressure and narrowing of arteries in the lungs.
The storage of undigested complex sugar molecules in connective tissues results in abnormalities in bones, joints and ligaments. This reduces your child's growth, causing pain and physical malformations and making it difficult for him or her to move.
Joint stiffness is caused by swelling of joint connective tissues and abnormalities of cartilage and bones. If your child is in pain, he or she will likely move less, which can lead to more stiffness and pain.
The group of abnormalities typically seen in the bones of people with Hunter syndrome is called dysostosis multiplex. Children with these abnormalities can develop irregularly shaped vertebrae and spines, ribs, arms, fingers, legs, and pelvises.
Bone abnormalities may cause many people with Hunter syndrome to be abnormally short. Those with milder cases may reach normal or near-normal height.
Hernias are common in Hunter syndrome. A hernia occurs when soft tissue, usually part of the intestine, pokes through a weak spot or tear in the lower abdominal wall.
Hernias associated with Hunter syndrome can become quite large and are often one of the first signs of the disorder. Enlargement of the liver and spleen may increase pressure in the abdomen, causing a hernia.
A variety of neurological complications may be present and continue to develop in children with Hunter syndrome.
Many neurological problems are caused by buildup of excess fluids in your child's brain. Pressure from these fluids can cause other problems that may cause severe headaches, interfere with vision and change your child's mental state.
Your child may also develop a condition in which the membranes that surround the spinal cord may become thick and scarred. This causes pressure and compression of the upper spinal cord. As a result, your child may develop fatigue in his or her legs and gradually weaken and become less physically active.
Other disorders, such as carpal tunnel syndrome, can result from nerve compression that happens because of bone deformities and storage of complex sugar molecules in tissues.
Abnormal behavior can develop in children with more-severe cases of Hunter syndrome. Often your child's mental development will become affected between the ages of 2 and 6.
Some children are hyperactive and have trouble paying attention or following directions. Your child may also behave aggressively and seem unable to sense danger. As your child's overall physical functioning declines, these behavior problems tend to become less severe.
Seizures also may occur in children with Hunter syndrome.
Recovery times from normal childhood illnesses may be longer for children with Hunter syndrome. As a result, be sure to take general preventive measures — for example, get your child a flu shot and ensure your child receives all necessary vaccinations.
Huntington's disease usually causes movement, cognitive and psychiatric disorders with a wide spectrum of signs and symptoms. Which symptoms appear first varies greatly from person to person. Some symptoms appear more dominant or have a greater effect on functional ability, but that can change throughout the course of the disease.
The movement disorders associated with Huntington's disease can include both involuntary movement problems and impairments in voluntary movements, such as: Involuntary jerking or writhing movements (chorea), Muscle problems, such as rigidity or muscle contracture (dystonia), Slow or abnormal eye movements, Impaired gait, posture and balance, Difficulty with speech or swallowing.
Impairments in voluntary movements — rather than the involuntary movements — may have a greater impact on a person's ability to work, perform daily activities, communicate and remain independent.
Cognitive impairments often associated with Huntington's disease include: Difficulty organizing, prioritizing or focusing on tasks, Lack of flexibility or the tendency to get stuck on a thought, behavior or action (perseveration), Lack of impulse control that can result in outbursts, acting without thinking and sexual promiscuity, Lack of awareness of one's own behaviors and abilities, Slowness in processing thoughts or ''finding'' words, Difficulty in learning new information.
The most common psychiatric disorder associated with Huntington's disease is depression. This isn't simply a reaction to receiving a diagnosis of Huntington's disease. Instead, depression appears to occur because of injury to the brain and subsequent changes in brain function. Signs and symptoms may include: Feelings of irritability, sadness or apathy, Social withdrawal, Insomnia, Fatigue and loss of energy, Frequent thoughts of death, dying or suicide.
Other common psychiatric disorders include: Obsessive-compulsive disorder, a condition marked by recurrent, intrusive thoughts and repetitive behaviors, Mania, which can cause elevated mood, overactivity, impulsive behavior and inflated self-esteem, Bipolar disorder, a condition with alternating episodes of depression and mania.
In addition to the above disorders, weight loss is common in people with Huntington's disease, especially as the disease progresses.
The start and progression of Huntington's disease in younger people may be slightly different from that in adults. Problems that often present early in the course of the disease include: Difficulty paying attention, Rapid, significant drop in overall school performance, Behavioral problems.
Contracted and rigid muscles that affect gait (especially in young children), Tremors or slight involuntary movements, Frequent falls or clumsiness, Seizures.
See your doctor if you notice changes in your movements, emotional state or mental ability. The signs and symptoms of Huntington's disease can be caused by a number of different conditions. Therefore, it's important to get a prompt, thorough diagnosis.
Huntington's disease is caused by an inherited defect in a single gene. Huntington's disease is an autosomal dominant disorder, which means that a person needs only one copy of the defective gene to develop the disorder.
With the exception of genes on the sex chromosomes, a person inherits two copies of every gene — one copy from each parent. A parent with a defective gene could pass along the defective copy of the gene or the healthy copy. Each child in the family, therefore, has a 50% chance of inheriting the gene that causes the genetic disorder.
After Huntington's disease starts, a person's functional abilities gradually worsen over time. The rate of disease progression and duration varies. The time from disease emergence to death is often about 10 to 30 years. Juvenile Huntington's disease usually results in death within 10 years after symptoms develop.
The clinical depression associated with Huntington's disease may increase the risk of suicide. Some research suggests that the greater risk of suicide occurs before a diagnosis is made and in the middle stages of the disease when a person starts to lose independence.
Eventually, a person with Huntington's disease requires help with all activities of daily living and care. Late in the disease, he or she will likely be confined to a bed and unable to speak. Someone with Huntington's disease is generally able to understand language and has an awareness of family and friends, though some won't recognize family members.
Common causes of death include: Pneumonia or other infections, Injuries related to falls, Complications related to the inability to swallow.
Hurthle cell cancer doesn't always cause symptoms, and it's sometimes detected during a physical examination or an imaging test done for some other reason.
Signs and symptoms of Hurthle cell cancer may include: A lump in your neck, just below your Adam's apple, Pain in your neck or throat, Hoarseness or other changes in your voice, Shortness of breath, Swallowing difficulty.
These signs and symptoms don't necessarily mean you have Hurthle cell cancer. They may be indications of other medical conditions — such as inflammation of the thyroid gland or a noncancerous enlargement of the thyroid (goiter).
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes Hurthle cell cancer.
Doctors know that cancer begins when a cell develops errors in its DNA — the genetic material that contains instructions for biochemical processes in your body. When DNA is altered or damaged, these genes may not function properly, causing cells to grow out of control and eventually form a mass (tumor) of cancerous (malignant) cells.
Factors that increase the risk of developing thyroid cancer include: Being female, Being older, Having a history of radiation treatments to the head and neck.
Possible complications of Hurthle cell cancer include:
Problems with swallowing and breathing. They can occur if the tumor grows and presses on the food tube (esophagus) and windpipe (trachea).
Spread of the cancer. Hurthle cell cancer can spread (metastasize) to other tissues and organs, making treatment and recovery more difficult.
Usually, the only indication of a hydrocele is a painless swelling of one or both testicles.
Adult men with a hydrocele might experience discomfort from the heaviness of a swollen scrotum. Pain generally increases with the size of the inflammation. Sometimes, the swollen area might be smaller in the morning and larger later in the day.
See your doctor if you or your child experiences scrotal swelling. It's important to rule out other causes of the swelling that might require treatment. For example, a hydrocele might be associated with a weak point in the abdominal wall that allows a loop of intestine to extend into the scrotum (inguinal hernia).
A baby's hydrocele typically disappears on its own. But if your baby's hydrocele doesn't disappear after a year or if it enlarges, ask your child's doctor to examine the hydrocele again.
Get immediate medical treatment if you or your child develops sudden, severe scrotal pain or swelling, especially within several hours of an injury to the scrotum. These signs and symptoms can occur with a number of conditions, including blocked blood flow in a twisted testicle (testicular torsion). Testicular torsion must be treated within hours of the beginning of signs and symptoms to save the testicle.
A hydrocele can develop before birth. Normally, the testicles descend from the developing baby's abdominal cavity into the scrotum. A sac accompanies each testicle, allowing fluid to surround the testicles. Usually, each sac closes and the fluid is absorbed.
Sometimes, the fluid remains after the sac closes (noncommunicating hydrocele). The fluid is usually absorbed gradually within the first year of life. But occasionally, the sac remains open (communicating hydrocele). The sac can change size or if the scrotal sac is compressed, fluid can flow back into the abdomen. Communicating hydroceles are often associated with inguinal hernia.
A hydrocele can develop as a result of injury or inflammation within the scrotum. Inflammation might be caused by an infection in the testicle or in the small, coiled tube at the back of each testicle (epididymitis).
Most hydroceles are present at birth. At least 5 percent of newborn boys have a hydrocele.  Babies who are born prematurely have a higher risk of having a hydrocele.
Risk factors for developing a hydrocele later in life include: Injury or inflammation to the scrotum, Infection, including a sexually transmitted infection (STI).
A hydrocele typically isn't dangerous and usually doesn't affect fertility. But a hydrocele might be associated with an underlying testicular condition that can cause serious complications, including:
Infection or tumor. Either might reduce sperm production or function.
Inguinal hernia. The loop of intestine trapped in the abdominal wall can lead to life-threatening complications.
The signs and symptoms of hydrocephalus vary somewhat by age of onset.
Common signs and symptoms of hydrocephalus in infants include: An unusually large head, A rapid increase in the size of the head, A bulging or tense soft spot (fontanel) on the top of the head.
Vomiting, Sleepiness, Irritability, Poor feeding, Seizures, Eyes fixed downward (sunsetting of the eyes), Deficits in muscle tone and strength, Poor responsiveness to touch, Poor growth.
Among toddlers and older children, signs and symptoms may include: Headache, Blurred or double vision, Eyes fixed downward (sunsetting of eyes), Abnormal enlargement of a toddler's head, Sleepiness or lethargy, Nausea or vomiting, Unstable balance, Poor coordination, Poor appetite, Seizures, Urinary incontinence.
Irritability, Change in personality, Decline in school performance, Delays or problems with previously acquired skills, such as walking or talking.
Common signs and symptoms in this age group include: Headache, Lethargy, Loss of coordination or balance, Loss of bladder control or a frequent urge to urinate, Impaired vision, Decline in memory, concentration and other thinking skills that may affect job performance.
Among adults 60 years of age and older, the more common signs and symptoms of hydrocephalus are: Loss of bladder control or a frequent urge to urinate, Memory loss, Progressive loss of other thinking or reasoning skills, Difficulty walking, often described as a shuffling gait or the feeling of the feet being stuck, Poor coordination or balance.
Seek emergency medical care for infants and toddlers experiencing these signs and symptoms: A high-pitched cry, Problems with sucking or feeding, Unexplained, recurrent vomiting, An unwillingness to move the head or lay down, Breathing difficulties, Seizures.
Seek prompt medical attention for other signs or symptoms in any age group.
Because more than one condition can result in the problems associated with hydrocephalus, it's important to get a timely diagnosis and appropriate care.
Hydrocephalus is caused by an imbalance between how much cerebrospinal fluid is produced and how much is absorbed into the bloodstream.
Cerebrospinal fluid is produced by tissues lining the ventricles of the brain. It flows through the ventricles by way of interconnecting channels. The fluid eventually flows into spaces around the brain and spinal column. It's absorbed primarily by blood vessels in tissues near the base of the brain.
Cerebrospinal fluid plays an important role in brain function by: Keeping the brain buoyant, allowing the relatively heavy brain to float within the skull, Cushioning the brain to prevent injury, Removing waste products of the brain's metabolism, Flowing back and forth between the brain cavity and spinal column to maintain a constant pressure within the brain — compensating for changes in blood pressure in the brain.
Excess cerebrospinal fluid in the ventricles occurs for one of the following reasons:
Obstruction. The most common problem is a partial obstruction of the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid, either from one ventricle to another or from the ventricles to other spaces around the brain.
Poor absorption. Less common is a problem with the mechanisms that enable the blood vessels to absorb cerebrospinal fluid. This is often related to inflammation of brain tissues from disease or injury.
Overproduction. Rarely, cerebrospinal fluid is created more quickly than it can be absorbed.
In many cases, the exact event leading to hydrocephalus is unknown. However, a number of developmental or medical problems can contribute to or trigger hydrocephalus.
Hydrocephalus present at birth (congenital) or shortly after birth may occur because of any of the following: Abnormal development of the central nervous system that can obstruct the flow of cerebrospinal fluid, Bleeding within the ventricles, a possible complication of premature birth, Infection in the uterus during a pregnancy, such as rubella or syphilis, that can cause inflammation in fetal brain tissues.
Other factors that can contribute to hydrocephalus among any age group include: Lesions or tumors of the brain or spinal cord, Central nervous system infections, such as bacterial meningitis or mumps, Bleeding in the brain from a stroke or head injury, Other traumatic injury to the brain.
You might not have signs or symptoms if your hypercalcemia is mild. More-severe cases produce signs and symptoms related to the parts of your body affected by the high calcium levels in your blood. Examples include:
Kidneys. Excess calcium makes your kidneys work harder to filter it. This can cause excessive thirst and frequent urination.
Digestive system. Hypercalcemia can cause stomach upset, nausea, vomiting and constipation.
Bones and muscles. In most cases, the excess calcium in your blood was leached from your bones, which weakens them. This can cause bone pain and muscle weakness.
Brain. Hypercalcemia can interfere with how your brain works, resulting in confusion, lethargy and fatigue. It can also cause depression.
Heart. Rarely, severe hypercalcemia can interfere with your heart function, causing palpitations and fainting, indications of cardiac arrhythmia, and other heart problems.
Contact your doctor if you develop signs and symptoms that might indicate hypercalcemia, such as being extremely thirsty, urinating frequently and having abdominal pain.
Besides building strong bones and teeth, calcium helps muscles contract and nerves transmit signals. Normally, if there isn't enough calcium in your blood, your parathyroid glands secrete a hormone that triggers: Your bones to release calcium into your blood, Your digestive tract to absorb more calcium, Your kidneys to excrete less calcium and activate more vitamin D, which plays a vital role in calcium absorption.
This delicate balance between too little calcium in your blood and hypercalcemia can be disrupted by a variety of factors. Hypercalcemia is caused by:
Overactive parathyroid glands (hyperparathyroidism). This most common cause of hypercalcemia can stem from a small, noncancerous (benign) tumor or enlargement of one or more of the four parathyroid glands.
Cancer. Lung cancer and breast cancer, as well as some blood cancers, can increase your risk of hypercalcemia. Spread of cancer (metastasis) to your bones also increases your risk.
Other diseases. Certain diseases, such as tuberculosis and sarcoidosis, can raise blood levels of vitamin D, which stimulates your digestive tract to absorb more calcium.
Hereditary factors. A rare genetic disorder known as familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia causes an increase of calcium in your blood because of faulty calcium receptors in your body. This condition doesn't cause symptoms or complications of hypercalcemia.
Immobility. People who have a condition that causes them to spend a lot of time sitting or lying down can develop hypercalcemia. Over time, bones that don't bear weight release calcium into the blood.
Severe dehydration. A common cause of mild or transient hypercalcemia is dehydration. Having less fluid in your blood causes a rise in calcium concentrations.
Medications. Certain drugs — such as lithium, used to treat bipolar disorder — might increase the release of parathyroid hormone.
Supplements. Taking excessive amounts of calcium or vitamin D supplements over time can raise calcium levels in your blood above normal.
Hypercalcemia complications can include:
Osteoporosis. If your bones continue to release calcium into your blood, you can develop the bone-thinning disease osteoporosis, which could lead to bone fractures, spinal column curvature and loss of height.
Kidney stones. If your urine contains too much calcium, crystals might form in your kidneys. Over time, the crystals can combine to form kidney stones. Passing a stone can be extremely painful.
Kidney failure. Severe hypercalcemia can damage your kidneys, limiting their ability to cleanse the blood and eliminate fluid.
Nervous system problems. Severe hypercalcemia can lead to confusion, dementia and coma, which can be fatal.
Abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia). Hypercalcemia can affect the electrical impulses that regulate your heartbeat, causing your heart to beat irregularly.
Early symptoms of HES may include fatigue, cough, breathlessness, muscle pain, rash and fever.
Some varieties of hypereosinophilic syndrome tend to run in families. Other types have been associated with certain types of cancers, infections or other health problems.
HES can affect anyone. But it occurs more often in men, usually between the ages of 20 and 50.
Hyperglycemia doesn't cause symptoms until glucose values are significantly elevated — usually above 180 to 200 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL), or 10 to 11.1 millimoles per liter (mmol/L). Symptoms of hyperglycemia develop slowly over several days or weeks. The longer blood sugar levels stay high, the more serious the symptoms become. However, some people who've had type 2 diabetes for a long time may not show any symptoms despite elevated blood sugar levels.
Recognizing early signs and symptoms of hyperglycemia can help you treat the condition promptly. Watch for: Frequent urination, Increased thirst, Blurred vision, Fatigue, Headache.
If hyperglycemia goes untreated, it can cause toxic acids (ketones) to build up in your blood and urine (ketoacidosis). Signs and symptoms include: Fruity-smelling breath, Nausea and vomiting, Shortness of breath, Dry mouth, Weakness, Confusion, Coma, Abdominal pain.
You are sick and can't keep any food or fluids down, Your blood glucose levels are persistently above 240 mg/dL (13.3 mmol/L) and you have ketones in your urine.
You experience ongoing diarrhea or vomiting, but you're able to take some foods or drinks, You have a fever that lasts more than 24 hours, Your blood glucose is more than 240 mg/dL (13.3 mmol/L) even though you've taken your diabetes medication, You have trouble keeping your blood glucose within the desired range.
During digestion, your body breaks down carbohydrates from foods — such as bread, rice and pasta — into various sugar molecules. One of these sugar molecules is glucose, a main energy source for your body. Glucose is absorbed directly into your bloodstream after you eat, but it can't enter the cells of most of your tissues without the help of insulin — a hormone secreted by your pancreas.
When the glucose level in your blood rises, it signals your pancreas to release insulin. The insulin unlocks your cells so that glucose can enter and provide the fuel your cells need to function properly. Any extra glucose is stored in your liver and muscles in the form of glycogen.
This process lowers the amount of glucose in your bloodstream and prevents it from reaching dangerously high levels. As your blood sugar level returns to normal, so does the secretion of insulin from your pancreas.
Diabetes drastically lowers insulin's effects on your body. This may be because your pancreas is unable to produce insulin (type 1 diabetes), or it may be because your body is resistant to the effects of insulin or doesn't produce enough insulin to maintain a normal glucose level (type 2 diabetes). As a result, glucose tends to build up in your bloodstream (hyperglycemia) and may reach dangerously high levels if not treated properly. Insulin or other drugs are used to lower blood sugar levels.
Many factors can contribute to hyperglycemia, including: Not using enough insulin or oral diabetes medication, Not injecting insulin properly or using expired insulin, Not following your diabetes eating plan, Being inactive, Having an illness or infection, Using certain medications, such as steroids, Being injured or having surgery, Experiencing emotional stress, such as family conflict or workplace challenges.
Illness or stress can trigger hyperglycemia because hormones produced to combat illness or stress can also cause your blood sugar to rise. Even people who don't have diabetes may develop transient hyperglycemia during severe illness. But people with diabetes may need to take extra diabetes medication to keep blood glucose near normal during illness or stress.
Keeping your blood sugar in a healthy range can help prevent many diabetes-related complications. Long-term complications of untreated hyperglycemia can include: Cardiovascular disease, Nerve damage (neuropathy), Kidney damage (diabetic nephropathy) or kidney failure, Damage to the blood vessels of the retina (diabetic retinopathy), potentially leading to blindness, Clouding of the normally clear lens of your eye (cataract), Feet problems caused by damaged nerves or poor blood flow that can lead to serious skin infections, ulcerations, and in some severe cases, amputation, Bone and joint problems, Teeth and gum infections.
If blood sugar rises high enough or for a prolonged period of time, it can lead to two serious conditions.
Diabetic ketoacidosis. Diabetic ketoacidosis develops when you don't have enough insulin in your body. When this happens, sugar (glucose) can't enter your cells for energy. Your blood sugar level rises, and your body begins to break down fat for energy.
This process produces toxic acids known as ketones. Excess ketones accumulate in the blood and eventually "spill over" into the urine. Left untreated, diabetic ketoacidosis can lead to a diabetic coma and be life-threatening.
Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state. This condition occurs when people produce insulin, but it doesn't work properly. Blood glucose levels may become very high — greater than 1,000 mg/dL (55.6 mmol/L). Because insulin is present but not working properly, the body can't use either glucose or fat for energy.
Glucose is then spilled into the urine, causing increased urination. Left untreated, diabetic hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state can lead to life-threatening dehydration and coma. Prompt medical care is essential.
Most people sweat when they exercise or exert themselves, are in a hot environment, or are anxious or under stress. The excessive sweating experienced with hyperhidrosis far exceeds such normal sweating.
The type of hyperhidrosis that usually affects the hands, feet, underarms or face causes at least one episode a week, during waking hours. And the sweating usually occurs on both sides of the body.
Sometimes excessive sweating is a sign of a serious condition.
Seek immediate medical attention if your heavy sweating is accompanied by lightheadedness, chest pain or nausea.
See your doctor if: Sweating disrupts your daily routine, Sweating causes emotional distress or social withdrawal, You suddenly begin to sweat more than usual, You experience night sweats for no apparent reason.
Sweating is your body's mechanism to cool itself. Your nervous system automatically triggers your sweat glands when your body temperature rises. Sweating also normally occurs, especially on your palms, when you're nervous.
The most common form of hyperhidrosis is called primary focal (essential) hyperhidrosis. With this type, the nerves responsible for signaling your sweat glands become overactive, even though they haven't been triggered by physical activity or a rise in temperature. With stress or nervousness, the problem becomes even worse. This type usually affects your palms and soles and sometimes your face.
There is no medical cause for this type of hyperhidrosis. It may have a hereditary component, because it sometimes runs in families.
Secondary hyperhidrosis occurs when excess sweating is due to a medical condition. It's the less common type. It's more likely to cause sweating all over your body. Conditions that may lead to heavy sweating include: Diabetes, Menopause hot flashes, Thyroid problems, Low blood sugar, Some types of cancer, Heart attack, Nervous system disorders, Infections.
Certain medications also can lead to heavy sweating, as can opioid withdrawal.
Complications of hyperhidrosis include:
Infections. People who sweat profusely are more prone to skin infections.
Social and emotional effects. Having clammy or dripping hands and perspiration-soaked clothes can be embarrassing. Your condition may affect your pursuit of work and educational goals.
Often, the first sign of hyperoxaluria is a kidney stone. Symptoms of a kidney stone can include: Severe or sudden back pain, Pain in the area below the ribs on the back (flank) that doesn't go away, Blood in the urine, Frequent urge to urinate, Pain when urinating, Chills or fever.
Kidney stones in childhood are uncommon. Kidney stones that form in children and teenagers are likely to be caused by an underlying condition, such as hyperoxaluria.
All young people with kidney stones should see a doctor for a thorough evaluation, including a test that measures oxalate in the urine. Adults with recurrent kidney stones also should be evaluated for oxalate in the urine.
Hyperoxaluria occurs when there is too much of a substance called oxalate in the urine. There are several types of hyperoxaluria:
Primary hyperoxaluria. Primary hyperoxaluria is a rare inherited (genetic) condition present at birth. In this type, the liver doesn't create enough of a certain protein (enzyme) that prevents overproduction of oxalate, or the enzyme doesn't work properly. Excess oxalate is eliminated through your kidneys, in your urine. The extra oxalate can combine with calcium to create kidney stones and crystals, which can damage the kidneys and cause them to stop working (renal failure).
Kidney stones form early and most often cause symptoms during childhood or adolescence. Because of the very large amounts of oxalate produced, the kidneys of many people with primary hyperoxaluria fail by early to middle adulthood. But renal failure can occur as early as infancy, while others with primary hyperoxaluria never develop kidney failure. To date, experts have identified three different genetic causes of primary hyperoxaluria.
Oxalosis. Oxalosis occurs if you have primary hyperoxaluria and your kidneys fail. Because your body can no longer eliminate the extra oxalate, it starts accumulating — first in your blood, then in your eyes, bones, skin, muscles, blood vessels, heart and other organs. This can cause multiple problems.
Enteric hyperoxaluria. Several intestinal diseases, including Crohn's disease and short bowel syndrome as a result of surgical procedures, increase the absorption of oxalate from foods, which can then increase the amount of oxalate excreted in the urine.
Hyperoxaluria related to eating high-oxalate foods. Eating large amounts of foods high in oxalate can increase your risk of hyperoxaluria or kidney stones. Ask your doctor or dietitian for a list of high-oxalate foods. Avoiding high-oxalate foods is particularly important if you have enteric hyperoxaluria.
Untreated primary hyperoxaluria can eventually damage your kidneys. Over time your kidneys may stop working. For some people, this is the first sign of the disease.
Signs and symptoms of kidney failure include: Decreased urine output or no urine output at all, Feeling generally ill and tired, Loss of appetite, nausea and vomiting, Pale skin color related to anemia, Swelling of hands and feet.
Oxalosis in its late stages can cause a variety of complications outside the kidney, including bone disease, anemia, skin ulcers, heart and eye problems, and in children, a failure to develop and grow normally.
Hyperparathyroidism is often diagnosed before signs or symptoms of the disorder are apparent. When symptoms do occur, they're the result of damage or dysfunction in other organs or tissues due to high calcium levels in the blood and urine or too little calcium in bones.
Symptoms may be so mild and nonspecific that they don't seem related to parathyroid function, or they may be severe. The range of signs and symptoms include: Osteoporosis, Kidney stones, Excessive urination, Abdominal pain, Tiring easily or weakness, Depression or forgetfulness, Bone and joint pain, Frequent complaints of illness with no apparent cause, Nausea, vomiting or loss of appetite.
See your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms of hyperparathyroidism. These symptoms could be caused by any number of disorders, including some with serious complications. It's important to get a prompt, accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment.
Hyperparathyroidism is caused by factors that increase the production of parathyroid hormone.
The parathyroid glands maintain proper levels of both calcium and phosphorus in your body by turning the secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) off or on, much like a thermostat controls a heating system to maintain a constant air temperature. Vitamin D also is involved in regulating the amount of calcium in your blood.
Normally, this balancing act works well. When calcium levels in your blood fall too low, your parathyroid glands secrete enough PTH to restore the balance. PTH raises calcium levels by releasing calcium from your bones and increasing the amount of calcium absorbed from your small intestine.
When blood-calcium levels are too high, the parathyroid glands produce less PTH. But sometimes one or more of these glands produce too much hormone. This leads to abnormally high calcium levels and low phosphorus levels in your blood.
Calcium is best known for its role in keeping your teeth and bones healthy. But calcium also aids in the transmission of signals in nerve cells, and it's involved in muscle contraction. Phosphorus, another mineral, works along with calcium in these areas.
Hyperparathyroidism may occur because of a problem with the parathyroid glands (primary hyperparathyroidism) or because of another disease that affects the glands' function (secondary hyperparathyroidism).
Primary hyperparathyroidism occurs because of some problem with one or more of the four parathyroid glands:
A noncancerous growth (adenoma) on a gland is the most common cause.
Enlargement (hyperplasia) of two or more parathyroid glands accounts for most other cases.
A cancerous tumor is a very rare cause of primary hyperparathyroidism.
Primary hyperparathyroidism usually occurs randomly, but some people inherit a gene that causes the disorder.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism is the result of another condition that lowers calcium levels. This causes your parathyroid glands to overwork to compensate for the calcium loss. Factors that may contribute to secondary hyperparathyroidism include:
Severe calcium deficiency. Your body may not get enough calcium from your diet, often because your digestive system doesn't absorb the calcium from it.
Severe vitamin D deficiency. Vitamin D helps maintain appropriate calcium levels in the blood. It also helps your digestive system absorb calcium from your food.
Your body produces vitamin D when your skin is exposed to sunlight. You also consume some vitamin D in food. If you don't get enough vitamin D, then calcium levels may drop.
Chronic kidney failure. Your kidneys convert vitamin D into a form that your body can use. If your kidneys work poorly, usable vitamin D may decline and calcium levels drop, causing parathyroid hormone levels to go up. Chronic kidney failure is the most common cause of secondary hyperparathyroidism. Some medical treatments, such as vitamin D, bisphosphonates and cinacalcet, will lower PTH levels.
In some people with long-term end-stage kidney disease, the parathyroid glands enlarge and begin to release PTH on their own, and PTH doesn't go down with medical treatment. This is called tertiary hyperparathyroidism, and people with this condition may require surgery to remove parathyroid tissue.
You may be at an increased risk of primary hyperparathyroidism if you: Are a woman who has gone through menopause, Have had prolonged, severe calcium or vitamin D deficiency, Have a rare, inherited disorder, such as multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1, which usually affects multiple glands, Have had radiation treatment for cancer that has exposed your neck to radiation, Have taken lithium, a drug most often used to treat bipolar disorder.
Complications of hyperparathyroidism are mainly related to the long-term effect of too little calcium in your bones and too much calcium in your bloodstream. Common complications include:
Osteoporosis. The loss of calcium often results in weak, brittle bones that fracture easily (osteoporosis).
Kidney stones. Too much calcium in your blood may lead to too much calcium in your urine, which can cause small, hard deposits of calcium and other substances to form in your kidneys. A kidney stone usually causes major pain as it passes through the urinary tract.
Cardiovascular disease. Although the exact cause-and-effect link is unclear, high calcium levels are associated with cardiovascular conditions, such as high blood pressure and certain types of heart disease.
Neonatal hypoparathyroidism. Severe, untreated hyperparathyroidism in pregnant women may cause dangerously low levels of calcium in newborns.
Hyperthyroidism can mimic other health problems, which can make it difficult for your doctor to diagnose. It can also cause a wide variety of signs and symptoms, including: Unintentional weight loss, even when your appetite and food intake stay the same or increase, Rapid heartbeat (tachycardia) — commonly more than 100 beats a minute, Irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia), Pounding of your heart (palpitations), Increased appetite, Nervousness, anxiety and irritability, Tremor — usually a fine trembling in your hands and fingers, Sweating, Changes in menstrual patterns, Increased sensitivity to heat, Changes in bowel patterns, especially more frequent bowel movements, An enlarged thyroid gland (goiter), which may appear as a swelling at the base of your neck, Fatigue, muscle weakness, Difficulty sleeping, Skin thinning, Fine, brittle hair.
Older adults are more likely to have either no signs or symptoms or subtle ones, such as an increased heart rate, heat intolerance and a tendency to become tired during ordinary activities.
Sometimes an uncommon problem called Graves' ophthalmopathy may affect your eyes, especially if you smoke. This disorder makes your eyeballs protrude beyond their normal protective orbits when the tissues and muscles behind your eyes swell. Eye problems often improve without treatment.
Signs and symptoms of Graves' ophthalmopathy include: Dry eyes, Red or swollen eyes, Excessive tearing or discomfort in one or both eyes, Light sensitivity, blurry or double vision, inflammation, or reduced eye movement, Protruding eyeballs.
If you experience unexplained weight loss, a rapid heartbeat, unusual sweating, swelling at the base of your neck or other signs and symptoms associated with hyperthyroidism, see your doctor. It's important to completely describe the changes you've observed, because many signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism may be associated with a number of other conditions.
If you've been treated for hyperthyroidism or you currently are being treated, see your doctor regularly as advised so that he or she can monitor your condition.
Hyperthyroidism can be caused by a number of conditions, including Graves' disease, Plummer's disease and thyroiditis.
Your thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland at the base of your neck, just below your Adam's apple. The thyroid gland has an enormous impact on your health. Every aspect of your metabolism is regulated by thyroid hormones.
Your thyroid gland produces two main hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), that influence every cell in your body. They maintain the rate at which your body uses fats and carbohydrates, help control your body temperature, influence your heart rate, and help regulate the production of protein. Your thyroid also produces a hormone that helps regulate the amount of calcium in your blood (calcitonin).
Normally, your thyroid releases the right amount of hormones, but sometimes it produces too much T4. This may occur for a number of reasons, including:
Graves' disease. Graves' disease is an autoimmune disorder in which antibodies produced by your immune system stimulate your thyroid to produce too much T4. It's the most common cause of hyperthyroidism.
Hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules (toxic adenoma, toxic multinodular goiter or Plummer's disease). This form of hyperthyroidism occurs when one or more adenomas of your thyroid produce too much T4. An adenoma is a part of the gland that has walled itself off from the rest of the gland, forming noncancerous (benign) lumps that may cause an enlargement of the thyroid.
Thyroiditis. Sometimes your thyroid gland can become inflamed after pregnancy, due to an autoimmune condition or for unknown reasons. The inflammation can cause excess thyroid hormone stored in the gland to leak into your bloodstream. Some types of thyroiditis may cause pain, while others are painless.
Risk factors for hyperthyroidism, include: A family history, particularly of Graves' disease, Female sex, A personal history of certain chronic illnesses, such as type 1 diabetes, pernicious anemia and primary adrenal insufficiency.
Hyperthyroidism can lead to a number of complications:
Heart problems. Some of the most serious complications of hyperthyroidism involve the heart. These include a rapid heart rate, a heart rhythm disorder called atrial fibrillation that increases your risk of stroke, and congestive heart failure — a condition in which your heart can't circulate enough blood to meet your body's needs.
Brittle bones. Untreated hyperthyroidism can also lead to weak, brittle bones (osteoporosis). The strength of your bones depends, in part, on the amount of calcium and other minerals they contain. Too much thyroid hormone interferes with your body's ability to incorporate calcium into your bones.
Eye problems. People with Graves' ophthalmopathy develop eye problems, including bulging, red or swollen eyes, sensitivity to light, and blurring or double vision. Untreated, severe eye problems can lead to vision loss.
Red, swollen skin. In rare cases, people with Graves' disease develop Graves' dermopathy. This affects the skin, causing redness and swelling, often on the shins and feet.
Thyrotoxic crisis. Hyperthyroidism also places you at risk of thyrotoxic crisis — a sudden intensification of your symptoms, leading to a fever, a rapid pulse and even delirium. If this occurs, seek immediate medical care.
Signs and symptoms of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may include one or more of the following: Chest pain, especially during exercise, Fainting, especially during or just after exercise or exertion, Heart murmur, which a doctor might detect while listening to your heart, Sensation of rapid, fluttering or pounding heartbeats (palpitations), Shortness of breath, especially during exercise.
A number of conditions can cause shortness of breath and heart palpitations. It's important to get a prompt, accurate diagnosis and appropriate care. See your doctor if you have a family history of HCM or any symptoms associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have any of the following symptoms for more than a few minutes: Rapid or irregular heartbeat, Difficulty breathing, Chest pain.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is usually caused by abnormal genes (gene mutations) that cause the heart muscle to grow abnormally thick.
In most people with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the muscular wall (septum) between the two bottom chambers of the heart (ventricles) becomes thicker than normal. As a result, the thicker wall may block blood flow out of the heart. This is called obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
If there's no significant blocking of blood flow, the condition is called nonobstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. However, the heart's main pumping chamber (left ventricle) may become stiff. This makes it hard for the heart to relax and reduces the amount of blood the ventricle can hold and send to the body with each heartbeat.
People with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy also have an abnormal arrangement of heart muscle cells (myofiber disarray). This can trigger arrhythmias in some people.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is usually passed down through families (inherited).
If you have a parent with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, you have a 50% chance of having the genetic mutation for the disease.
Parents, children or siblings of a person with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy should ask their doctors about screening for the disease.
Many people with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) don't have significant health problems. But complications of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can include:
Atrial fibrillation. Thickened heart muscle, as well as the abnormal structure of heart cells, can cause changes in the heart's electrical system, resulting in fast or irregular heartbeats. Atrial fibrillation can also increase your risk of developing blood clots, which can travel to your brain and cause a stroke.
Blocked blood flow. In many people, the thickened heart muscle blocks the blood flow leaving the heart, causing shortness of breath with exertion, chest pain, dizziness and fainting spells.
Mitral valve problems. If the thickened heart muscle blocks the blood flow leaving the heart, the valve between the left atrium and left ventricle (mitral valve) may not close properly. As a result, blood can leak backward into the left atrium (mitral valve regurgitation), possibly leading to worsening symptoms.
Dilated cardiomyopathy. In a very small number of people with HCM, the thickened heart muscle may become weak and ineffective. The ventricle becomes enlarged (dilated), and its pumping ability becomes less forceful.
Heart failure. The thickened heart muscle can eventually become too stiff to effectively fill the heart with blood. As a result, your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs.
Sudden cardiac death. Rarely, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can cause heart-related sudden death in people of all ages. Because many people with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy don't realize they have it, sudden cardiac death may be the first sign of a problem. It can happen in seemingly healthy young people, including high school athletes and other young, active adults.
If blood sugar levels become too low, signs and symptoms can include: An irregular or fast heartbeat, Fatigue, Pale skin, Shakiness, Anxiety, Sweating, Hunger, Irritability, Tingling or numbness of the lips, tongue or cheek.
As hypoglycemia worsens, signs and symptoms can include: Confusion, abnormal behavior or both, such as the inability to complete routine tasks, Visual disturbances, such as blurred vision, Seizures, Loss of consciousness.
Seek a doctor's help immediately if: You have what might be hypoglycemia symptoms and you don't have diabetes, You have diabetes and hypoglycemia isn't responding to treatment, such as drinking juice or regular soft drinks, eating candy, or taking glucose tablets.
Seek emergency help for someone with diabetes or a history of hypoglycemia who has symptoms of severe hypoglycemia or loses consciousness.
Hypoglycemia occurs when your blood sugar (glucose) level falls too low. There are several reasons why this can happen; the most common is a side effect of drugs used to treat diabetes.
When you eat, your body breaks down carbohydrates from foods — such as bread, rice, pasta, vegetables, fruit and milk products — into various sugar molecules, including glucose.
Glucose, the main energy source for your body, enters the cells of most of your tissues with the help of insulin — a hormone secreted by your pancreas. Insulin enables the glucose to enter the cells and provide the fuel your cells need. Extra glucose is stored in your liver and muscles in the form of glycogen.
If you haven't eaten for several hours and your blood sugar level drops, another hormone from your pancreas signals your liver to break down the stored glycogen and release glucose into your bloodstream. This keeps your blood sugar within a normal range until you eat again.
Your body also has the ability to make glucose. This process occurs mainly in your liver, but also in your kidneys.
If you have diabetes, you might not make enough insulin (type 1 diabetes) or you might be less responsive to it (type 2 diabetes). As a result, glucose tends to build up in the bloodstream and can reach dangerously high levels. To correct this problem, you might take insulin or other drugs to lower blood sugar levels.
But too much insulin or other diabetes medications may cause your blood sugar level to drop too low, causing hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia can also occur if you eat less than usual after taking diabetes medication, or if you exercise more than you normally do.
Hypoglycemia in people without diabetes is much less common. Causes can include the following:
Medications. Taking someone else's oral diabetes medication accidentally is a possible cause of hypoglycemia. Other medications can cause hypoglycemia, especially in children or in people with kidney failure. One example is quinine (Qualaquin), used to treat malaria.
Excessive alcohol drinking. Drinking heavily without eating can block your liver from releasing stored glucose into your bloodstream, causing hypoglycemia.
Some critical illnesses. Severe liver illnesses such as severe hepatitis or cirrhosis can cause hypoglycemia. Kidney disorders, which can keep your body from properly excreting medications, can affect glucose levels due to a buildup of those medications.
Long-term starvation, as can occur in the eating disorder anorexia nervosa, can result in too little of substances your body needs to create glucose.
Insulin overproduction. A rare tumor of the pancreas (insulinoma) can cause you to produce too much insulin, resulting in hypoglycemia. Other tumors also can result in too much production of insulin-like substances. Enlargement of cells of the pancreas that produce insulin can result in excessive insulin release, causing hypoglycemia.
Hormone deficiencies. Certain adrenal gland and pituitary tumor disorders can result in a deficiency of key hormones that regulate glucose production. Children can have hypoglycemia if they have too little growth hormone.
Hypoglycemia usually occurs when you haven't eaten, but not always. Sometimes hypoglycemia symptoms occur after certain meals high in sugar because your body produces more insulin than you need.
This type of hypoglycemia, called reactive hypoglycemia or postprandial hypoglycemia, can occur in people who have had stomach bypass surgery. It can also occur in people who haven't had this surgery.
Untreated hypoglycemia can lead to: Seizure, Loss of consciousness, Death.
Hypoglycemia can also contribute to the following: Dizziness and weakness, Falls, Injuries, Motor vehicle accidents, Greater risk of dementia in older adults.
Over time, repeated episodes of hypoglycemia can lead to hypoglycemia unawareness. The body and brain no longer produce signs and symptoms that warn of a low blood sugar, such as shakiness or irregular heartbeats. When this happens, the risk of severe, life-threatening hypoglycemia increases.
If you have diabetes, recurring episodes of hypoglycemia and hypoglycemia unawareness, your doctor might modify your treatment, raise your blood sugar level goals and recommend blood glucose awareness training.
If you have diabetes, episodes of low blood sugar are uncomfortable and can be frightening. Fear of hypoglycemia can cause you to take less insulin to ensure that your blood sugar level doesn't go too low. This can lead to uncontrolled diabetes. Talk to your doctor about your fear, and don't change your diabetes medication dose without your doctor's okay.
Hyponatremia signs and symptoms may include: Nausea and vomiting, Headache, Confusion, Loss of energy, drowsiness and fatigue, Restlessness and irritability, Muscle weakness, spasms or cramps, Seizures, Coma.
Seek emergency care for anyone who develops severe signs and symptoms of hyponatremia, such as nausea and vomiting, confusion, seizures, or lost consciousness.
Call your doctor if you know you are at risk of hyponatremia and are experiencing nausea, headaches, cramping or weakness. Depending on the extent and duration of these signs and symptoms, your doctor may recommend seeking immediate medical care.
Sodium plays a key role in your body. It helps maintain normal blood pressure, supports the work of your nerves and muscles, and regulates your body's fluid balance.
A normal blood sodium level is between 135 and 145 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L). Hyponatremia occurs when the sodium in your blood falls below 135 mEq/L.
Many possible conditions and lifestyle factors can lead to hyponatremia, including:
Certain medications. Some medications, such as some water pills (diuretics), antidepressants and pain medications, can interfere with the normal hormonal and kidney processes that keep sodium concentrations within the healthy normal range.
Heart, kidney and liver problems. Congestive heart failure and certain diseases affecting the kidneys or liver can cause fluids to accumulate in your body, which dilutes the sodium in your body, lowering the overall level.
Syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH). In this condition, high levels of the anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) are produced, causing your body to retain water instead of excreting it normally in your urine.
Chronic, severe vomiting or diarrhea and other causes of dehydration. This causes your body to lose electrolytes, such as sodium, and also increases ADH levels.
Drinking too much water. Drinking excessive amounts of water can cause low sodium by overwhelming the kidneys' ability to excrete water. Because you lose sodium through sweat, drinking too much water during endurance activities, such as marathons and triathlons, can also dilute the sodium content of your blood.
Hormonal changes. Adrenal gland insufficiency (Addison's disease) affects your adrenal glands' ability to produce hormones that help maintain your body's balance of sodium, potassium and water. Low levels of thyroid hormone also can cause a low blood-sodium level.
The recreational drug Ecstasy. This amphetamine increases the risk of severe and even fatal cases of hyponatremia.
The following factors may increase your risk of hyponatremia:
Age. Older adults may have more contributing factors for hyponatremia, including age-related changes, taking certain medications and a greater likelihood of developing a chronic disease that alters the body's sodium balance.
Certain drugs. Medications that increase your risk of hyponatremia include thiazide diuretics as well as some antidepressants and pain medications. In addition, the recreational drug Ecstasy has been linked to fatal cases of hyponatremia.
Conditions that decrease your body's water excretion. Medical conditions that may increase your risk of hyponatremia include kidney disease, syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH) and heart failure, among others.
Intensive physical activities. People who drink too much water while taking part in marathons, ultramarathons, triathlons and other long-distance, high-intensity activities are at an increased risk of hyponatremia.
In chronic hyponatremia, sodium levels drop gradually over 48 hours or longer — and symptoms and complications are typically more moderate.
In acute hyponatremia, sodium levels drop rapidly — resulting in potentially dangerous effects, such as rapid brain swelling, which can result in a coma and death.
Premenopausal women appear to be at the greatest risk of hyponatremia-related brain damage. This may be related to the effect of women's sex hormones on the body's ability to balance sodium levels.
Signs and symptoms of hypoparathyroidism can include: Tingling or burning in your fingertips, toes and lips, Muscle aches or cramps in your legs, feet, stomach or face, Twitching or spasms of your muscles, particularly around your mouth, but also in your hands, arms and throat, Fatigue or weakness, Painful menstrual periods, Patchy hair loss, Dry, coarse skin, Brittle nails, Depression or anxiety.
If you have signs or symptoms associated with hypoparathyroidism, see your doctor for an evaluation. Contact your doctor immediately if you have a seizure or have difficulty breathing. These can both be complications of hypoparathyroidism.
Hypoparathyroidism occurs when your parathyroid glands don't secrete enough parathyroid hormone. You have four small parathyroid glands in your neck behind your thyroid gland.
Factors that can cause hypoparathyroidism include:
Neck surgery. This most common cause of hypoparathyroidism develops after accidental damage to or removal of the parathyroid glands during surgery. Neck surgery may be done to treat conditions of the thyroid gland, or to treat throat or neck cancer.
Autoimmune disease. In some cases, your immune system attacks parathyroid tissues as if they were foreign bodies. In the process, the parathyroid glands stop producing their hormone.
Hereditary hypoparathyroidism. In this form, either you're born without parathyroid glands or they don't work properly. Some types of hereditary hypoparathyroidism are associated with deficiencies of other hormone-producing glands.
Low levels of magnesium in your blood. Low magnesium levels can affect the function of your parathyroid glands. Normal magnesium levels are required for normal production of parathyroid hormone.
Extensive cancer radiation treatment of your face or neck. Radiation can result in destruction of your parathyroid glands. In rare cases, radioactive iodine treatment for hyperthyroidism may lead to hypoparathyroidism.
Factors that can increase your risk of developing hypoparathyroidism include: Recent neck surgery, particularly if the thyroid was involved, A family history of hypoparathyroidism, Having certain autoimmune or endocrine conditions, such as Addison's disease — which causes a decrease in the hormones your adrenal glands produce.
Hypoparathyroidism can result in various complications.
The following are due to low calcium levels, most of which are likely to improve with treatment:
Cramplike spasms of your hands and fingers that can be prolonged and painful, or muscle pain and twitches or spasms of the muscles of your face, throat or arms. When these spasms occur in your throat, they can interfere with breathing, creating a possible emergency.
Tingling or burning sensations, or a pins and needles feeling, in your lips, tongue, fingers and toes.
Seizures.
Malformed teeth, affecting dental enamel and roots, in cases when hypoparathyroidism occurs at an early age when teeth are developing.
Problems with kidney function.
Heart arrhythmias and fainting, even heart failure.
Accurate diagnosis and treatment might prevent these complications associated with hypoparathyroidism. But once they occur, calcium and vitamin D won't improve them: Stunted growth, Slow mental development in children, Calcium deposits in the brain, which can cause balance problems and seizures, Clouded vision due to cataracts.
The signs and symptoms of hypopituitarism usually develop gradually and get worse over time. They are sometimes subtle and may be overlooked for months or even years. But for some people, signs and symptoms develop suddenly.
Signs and symptoms of hypopituitarism vary from person to person, depending on which pituitary hormones are affected and to what degree. In people who have more than one pituitary hormone deficiency, the second deficiency may increase or, in some cases, hide the symptoms of the first deficiency.
In children, GH deficiency may cause growth problems and short stature. Most adults who have GH deficiency don't have any symptoms, but for some adults it can cause: Fatigue, Muscle weakness, Changes in body fat composition, Lack of ambition, Social isolation.
Deficiency of these hormones, called gonadotropins, affect the reproductive system. In women, the deficiency decreases egg and estrogen production from the ovaries. In men, the deficiency decreases sperm and testosterone production from the testicles. Women and men may experience a lower sex drive, infertility or fatigue. In children and adolescents, delayed puberty is usually the only symptom.
Women may also have symptoms such as: Hot flashes, Irregular or no periods, Loss of pubic hair, An inability to produce milk for breast-feeding.
Men may also have symptoms such as: Erectile dysfunction, Decreased facial or body hair, Mood changes.
This hormone controls the thyroid gland. A TSH deficiency leads to low levels of thyroid hormones (hypothyroidism). This causes symptoms such as: Fatigue, Weight gain, Dry skin, Constipation, Sensitivity to cold or difficulty staying warm.
This hormone helps your adrenal glands work properly, and helps your body react to stress. Symptoms of ACTH deficiency include: Severe fatigue, Low blood pressure, which may lead to fainting, Frequent and prolonged infections, Nausea, vomiting or abdominal pain, Confusion.
This hormone, which is also called vasopressin, helps your body balance its fluid levels. An ADH deficiency can cause a disorder called diabetes insipidus, which can cause: Excessive urination, Extreme thirst, Electrolyte imbalances.
Prolactin is the hormone that tells the body when to start making breast milk. Low levels of prolactin can cause women to have problems making milk for breast-feeding.
See your doctor if you develop any of the signs and symptoms associated with hypopituitarism.
Contact your doctor immediately if signs or symptoms of hypopituitarism develop suddenly or are associated with a severe headache, visual disturbances, confusion or a drop in blood pressure. These could be signs and symptoms of sudden destruction of the pituitary gland tissue (pituitary apoplexy), often caused by bleeding into the pituitary gland. Pituitary apoplexy is a medical emergency and requires prompt medical attention.
Hypopituitarism has a number of causes. In many cases, hypopituitarism is caused by a tumor of the pituitary gland. As a pituitary tumor increases in size, it can compress and damage pituitary tissue, interfering with hormone production. A tumor can also compress the optic nerves, causing visual disturbances.
In addition to tumors, certain diseases or events that cause damage to the pituitary gland may also trigger hypopituitarism. Examples include: Head injuries, Brain surgery, Radiation treatment to the head or neck, Lack of blood flow to the brain or pituitary gland (stroke) or bleeding (hemorrhage) into the brain or pituitary gland, Certain medications, such as narcotics, high-dose corticosteroids or certain cancer drugs called checkpoint inhibitors, Inflammation of the pituitary gland caused by an abnormal immune system response (hypophysitis), Infections of the brain, such as meningitis, or infections that can spread to the brain, such as tuberculosis or syphilis, Infiltrative diseases, which affect multiple parts of the body, including sarcoidosis, an inflammatory disease occurring in various organs; Langerhans cell histiocytosis, in which abnormal cells cause scarring in numerous parts of the body; and hemochromatosis, which causes excess iron deposits in the liver and other tissues, Severe loss of blood during childbirth, which may cause damage to the front part of the pituitary gland (Sheehan's syndrome or postpartum pituitary necrosis).
In some cases, hypopituitarism is caused by a genetic mutation (inherited). These mutations affect the pituitary gland's ability to produce one or more of its hormones, often starting at birth or in early childhood.
Tumors or diseases of the hypothalamus, a portion of the brain situated just above the pituitary, also can cause hypopituitarism. The hypothalamus produces hormones of its own that directly affect the activity of the pituitary gland.
In some cases, the cause of hypopituitarism is unknown.
Babies born with hypoplastic left heart syndrome usually are seriously ill soon after birth. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome symptoms include: Grayish-blue skin color (cyanosis), Rapid, difficult breathing, Poor feeding, Cold hands and feet, Weak pulse, Being unusually drowsy or inactive.
If the natural connections between the heart's left and right sides (foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus) are allowed to close in the first few days of life in a baby with hypoplastic left heart syndrome, he or she can go into shock and may die. Signs of shock include: Cool, clammy skin that may be pale or gray, A weak and rapid pulse, Abnormal breathing that may be either slow and shallow or very rapid, Lackluster eyes that seem to stare.
A baby who is in shock may be conscious or unconscious. If you suspect your baby is in shock, immediately call 911 or your local emergency number.
It's likely that your baby would be diagnosed with hypoplastic left heart syndrome either before birth or soon after. However, you should seek medical help if you notice that your baby has the following symptoms: Grayish-blue skin color, Rapid, difficult breathing, Poor feeding, Cold hands and feet, Weak pulse, Being unusually drowsy or inactive.
If your baby has any of the following signs of shock, call 911 or your local emergency number right away: Cool, clammy skin that may be pale or gray, A weak and rapid pulse, Abnormal breathing that may be either slow and shallow or very rapid, Lackluster eyes that seem to stare.
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome occurs during fetal growth when the baby's heart is developing. The cause is unknown. However, if your family has one child with hypoplastic left heart syndrome, the risk of having another with a similar condition is increased.
A normal heart has four chambers, two on the right and two on the left. In performing its basic job — pumping blood throughout the body — the heart uses its left and right sides for different tasks.
The right side moves blood to the lungs. In the lungs, oxygen enriches the blood, which then circulates to the heart's left side. The left side of the heart pumps blood into a large vessel called the aorta, which circulates the oxygen-rich blood to the rest of the body.
In hypoplastic left heart syndrome, the left side of the heart can't properly supply blood to the body because the lower left chamber (left ventricle) is too small or in some cases may not even exist. In addition, the valves on the left side of the heart (aortic valve and mitral valve) don't work properly, and the main artery leaving the heart (aorta) is smaller than normal.
For the first several days of life, the right side of the heart can pump blood both to the lungs and to the rest of the body through a blood vessel that connects the pulmonary artery directly to the aorta (ductus arteriosus). The oxygen-rich blood returns to the right side of the heart through a natural opening (foramen ovale) between the right chambers of the heart (atria). When the foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus are open, they are referred to as being "patent."
If the ductus arteriosus and the foramen ovale close — which they normally do after the first day or two of life — the right side of the heart has no way to pump blood out to the body. Keeping these connections open with medication is necessary for survival in the first few days of life in babies with hypoplastic left heart syndrome. This will keep blood flowing to the body until heart surgery is performed.
If you already have a child with hypoplastic left heart syndrome, you have a higher risk of having another baby with this condition or a similar condition.
Beyond family history, there are no clear risk factors for hypoplastic left heart syndrome.
Without surgery, hypoplastic left heart syndrome is fatal, usually within the first few weeks of life.
With treatment, many babies survive, although most will have complications later in life. Some of the complications may include: Tiring easily when participating in sports or other exercise, Heart rhythm abnormalities (arrhythmias), Fluid buildup in the lungs, abdomen, legs and feet (edema), Growth restriction, Formation of blood clots that may lead to a pulmonary embolism or stroke, Developmental problems related to the brain and nervous system, Need for additional heart surgery or transplantation.
In hypospadias, the opening of the urethra is located on the underside of the penis instead of at the tip. In most cases, the opening of the urethra is within the head of the penis. Less often, the opening is at the middle or the base of the penis. Rarely, the opening is in or beneath the scrotum.
Signs and symptoms of hypospadias may include: Opening of the urethra at a location other than the tip of the penis, Downward curve of the penis (chordee), Hooded appearance of the penis because only the top half of the penis is covered by foreskin, Abnormal spraying during urination.
When to see a doctor
Most infants with hypospadias are diagnosed soon after birth while still in the hospital. However, slight displacement of the urethral opening may be subtle and more difficult to identify. Talk to your doctor if you have concerns about the appearance of your child's penis or if there are problems with urination.
Hypospadias is present at birth (congenital). As the penis develops in a male fetus, certain hormones stimulate the formation of the urethra and foreskin. Hypospadias results when a malfunction occurs in the action of these hormones, causing the urethra to develop abnormally.
In most cases, the exact cause of hypospadias is unknown. Sometimes, hypospadias is genetic, but environment also may play a role.
Although the cause of hypospadias is usually unknown, these factors may be associated with the condition:
Family history. This condition is more common in infants with a family history of hypospadias.
Genetics. Certain gene variations may play a role in disruption of the hormones that stimulate formation of the male genitals.
Maternal age over 35. Some research suggests that there may be an increased risk of hypospadias in infant males born to women older than 35 years.
Exposure to certain substances during pregnancy. There is some speculation about an association between hypospadias and a mother's exposure to certain hormones or certain compounds such as pesticides or industrial chemicals, but further studies are needed to confirm this.
If hypospadias is not treated, it can result in: Abnormal appearance of the penis, Problems learning to use a toilet, Abnormal curvature of the penis with erection, Problems with impaired ejaculation.
Shivering is likely the first thing you'll notice as the temperature starts to drop because it's your body's automatic defense against cold temperature — an attempt to warm itself.
Signs and symptoms of hypothermia include: Shivering, Slurred speech or mumbling, Slow, shallow breathing, Weak pulse, Clumsiness or lack of coordination, Drowsiness or very low energy, Confusion or memory loss, Loss of consciousness, Bright red, cold skin (in infants).
Someone with hypothermia usually isn't aware of his or her condition because the symptoms often begin gradually. Also, the confused thinking associated with hypothermia prevents self-awareness. The confused thinking can also lead to risk-taking behavior.
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you suspect someone has hypothermia.
While you wait for emergency help to arrive, gently move the person inside if possible. Jarring movements can trigger dangerous irregular heartbeats. Carefully remove his or her wet clothing, replacing it with warm, dry coats or blankets.
Hypothermia occurs when your body loses heat faster than it produces it. The most common causes of hypothermia are exposure to cold-weather conditions or cold water. But prolonged exposure to any environment colder than your body can lead to hypothermia if you aren't dressed appropriately or can't control the conditions.
Specific conditions leading to hypothermia include: Wearing clothes that aren't warm enough for weather conditions, Staying out in the cold too long, Being unable to get out of wet clothes or move to a warm, dry location, Falling into the water, as in a boating accident, Living in a house that's too cold, either from poor heating or too much air conditioning.
The mechanisms of heat loss from your body include the following:
Radiated heat. Most heat loss is due to heat radiated from unprotected surfaces of your body.
Direct contact. If you're in direct contact with something very cold, such as cold water or the cold ground, heat is conducted away from your body. Because water is very good at transferring heat from your body, body heat is lost much faster in cold water than in cold air. Similarly, heat loss from your body is much faster if your clothes are wet, as when you're caught out in the rain.
Wind. Wind removes body heat by carrying away the thin layer of warm air at the surface of your skin. A wind chill factor is important in causing heat loss.
Risk factors for hypothermia include:
Exhaustion. Your tolerance for cold diminishes when you are fatigued.
Older age. The body's ability to regulate temperature and to sense cold may lessen with age. And some older adults may not be able to communicate when they are cold or to move to a warm location if they do feel cold.
Very young age. Children lose heat faster than adults do. Children may also ignore the cold because they're having too much fun to think about it. And they may not have the judgment to dress properly in cold weather or to get out of the cold when they should.
Mental problems. People with a mental illness, dementia or other conditions that interfere with judgment may not dress appropriately for the weather or understand the risk of cold weather. People with dementia may wander from home or get lost easily, making them more likely to be stranded outside in cold or wet weather.
Alcohol and drug use. Alcohol may make your body feel warm inside, but it causes your blood vessels to expand, resulting in more rapid heat loss from the surface of your skin. The body's natural shivering response is diminished in people who've been drinking alcohol.
In addition, the use of alcohol or recreational drugs can affect your judgment about the need to get inside or wear warm clothes in cold-weather conditions. If a person is intoxicated and passes out in cold weather, he or she is likely to develop hypothermia.
Certain medical conditions. Some health disorders affect your body's ability to regulate body temperature. Examples include an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), poor nutrition or anorexia nervosa, diabetes, stroke, severe arthritis, Parkinson's disease, trauma, and spinal cord injuries.
Medications. Some drugs can change the body's ability to regulate its temperature. Examples include certain antidepressants, antipsychotics, narcotic pain medications and sedatives.
People who develop hypothermia because of exposure to cold weather or cold water are also vulnerable to other cold-related injuries, including: Freezing of body tissues (frostbite), Decay and death of tissue resulting from an interruption in blood flow (gangrene).
The signs and symptoms of hypothyroidism vary, depending on the severity of the hormone deficiency. Problems tend to develop slowly, often over a number of years.
At first, you may barely notice the symptoms of hypothyroidism, such as fatigue and weight gain. Or you may simply attribute them to getting older. But as your metabolism continues to slow, you may develop more-obvious problems.
Hypothyroidism signs and symptoms may include: Fatigue, Increased sensitivity to cold, Constipation, Dry skin, Weight gain, Puffy face, Hoarseness, Muscle weakness, Elevated blood cholesterol level, Muscle aches, tenderness and stiffness, Pain, stiffness or swelling in your joints, Heavier than normal or irregular menstrual periods, Thinning hair, Slowed heart rate, Depression, Impaired memory, Enlarged thyroid gland (goiter).
Although hypothyroidism most often affects middle-aged and older women, anyone can develop the condition, including infants. Initially, babies born without a thyroid gland or with a gland that doesn't work properly may have few signs and symptoms. When newborns do have problems with hypothyroidism, the problems may include:
Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice). In most cases, this occurs when a baby's liver can't metabolize a substance called bilirubin, which normally forms when the body recycles old or damaged red blood cells.
A large, protruding tongue.
Difficulty breathing.
Hoarse crying.
An umbilical hernia.
As the disease progresses, infants are likely to have trouble feeding and may fail to grow and develop normally. They may also have: Constipation, Poor muscle tone, Excessive sleepiness.
When hypothyroidism in infants isn't treated, even mild cases can lead to severe physical and mental retardation.
In general, children and teens who develop hypothyroidism have the same signs and symptoms as adults do, but they may also experience: Poor growth, resulting in short stature, Delayed development of permanent teeth, Delayed puberty, Poor mental development.
See your doctor if you're feeling tired for no reason or have any of the other signs or symptoms of hypothyroidism, such as dry skin, a pale, puffy face, constipation or a hoarse voice.
If you're receiving hormone therapy for hypothyroidism, schedule follow-up visits as often as your doctor recommends. Initially, it's important to make sure you're receiving the correct dose of medicine. And over time, the dose you need may change.
When your thyroid doesn't produce enough hormones, the balance of chemical reactions in your body can be upset. There can be a number of causes, including autoimmune disease, hyperthyroidism treatments, radiation therapy, thyroid surgery and certain medications.
Your thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland situated at the base of the front of your neck, just below your Adam's apple. Hormones produced by the thyroid gland — triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) — have an enormous impact on your health, affecting all aspects of your metabolism. These hormones also influence the control of vital functions, such as body temperature and heart rate.
Hypothyroidism results when the thyroid gland fails to produce enough hormones. Hypothyroidism may be due to a number of factors, including:
Autoimmune disease. The most common cause of hypothyroidism is an autoimmune disorder known as Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Autoimmune disorders occur when your immune system produces antibodies that attack your own tissues. Sometimes this process involves your thyroid gland.
Scientists aren't sure why this happens, but it's likely a combination of factors, such as your genes and an environmental trigger. However it happens, these antibodies affect the thyroid's ability to produce hormones.
Over-response to hyperthyroidism treatment. People who produce too much thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism) are often treated with radioactive iodine or anti-thyroid medications. The goal of these treatments is to get thyroid function back to normal. But sometimes, correcting hyperthyroidism can end up lowering thyroid hormone production too much, resulting in permanent hypothyroidism.
Thyroid surgery. Removing all or a large portion of your thyroid gland can diminish or halt hormone production. In that case, you'll need to take thyroid hormone for life.
Radiation therapy. Radiation used to treat cancers of the head and neck can affect your thyroid gland and may lead to hypothyroidism.
Medications. A number of medications can contribute to hypothyroidism. One such medication is lithium, which is used to treat certain psychiatric disorders. If you're taking medication, ask your doctor about its effect on your thyroid gland.
Less often, hypothyroidism may result from one of the following:
Congenital disease. Some babies are born with a defective thyroid gland or no thyroid gland. In most cases, the thyroid gland didn't develop normally for unknown reasons, but some children have an inherited form of the disorder. Often, infants with congenital hypothyroidism appear normal at birth. That's one reason why most states now require newborn thyroid screening.
Pituitary disorder. A relatively rare cause of hypothyroidism is the failure of the pituitary gland to produce enough thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) — usually because of a benign tumor of the pituitary gland.
Pregnancy. Some women develop hypothyroidism during or after pregnancy (postpartum hypothyroidism), often because they produce antibodies to their own thyroid gland. Left untreated, hypothyroidism increases the risk of miscarriage, premature delivery and preeclampsia — a condition that causes a significant rise in a woman's blood pressure during the last three months of pregnancy. It can also seriously affect the developing fetus.
Iodine deficiency. The trace mineral iodine — found primarily in seafood, seaweed, plants grown in iodine-rich soil and iodized salt — is essential for the production of thyroid hormones. Too little iodine can lead to hypothyroidism, and too much iodine can worsen hypothyroidism in people who already have the condition. In some parts of the world, iodine deficiency is common, but the addition of iodine to table salt has virtually eliminated this problem in the United States.
Although anyone can develop hypothyroidism, you're at an increased risk if you: Are a woman, Are older than 60, Have a family history of thyroid disease, Have an autoimmune disease, such as type 1 diabetes or celiac disease, Have been treated with radioactive iodine or anti-thyroid medications, Received radiation to your neck or upper chest, Have had thyroid surgery (partial thyroidectomy), Have been pregnant or delivered a baby within the past six months.
Untreated hypothyroidism can lead to a number of health problems:
Goiter. Constant stimulation of your thyroid to release more hormones may cause the gland to become larger — a condition known as a goiter. Although generally not uncomfortable, a large goiter can affect your appearance and may interfere with swallowing or breathing.
Heart problems. Hypothyroidism may also be associated with an increased risk of heart disease and heart failure, primarily because high levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol — the "bad" cholesterol — can occur in people with an underactive thyroid.
Mental health issues. Depression may occur early in hypothyroidism and may become more severe over time. Hypothyroidism can also cause slowed mental functioning.
Peripheral neuropathy. Long-term uncontrolled hypothyroidism can cause damage to your peripheral nerves. These are the nerves that carry information from your brain and spinal cord to the rest of your body — for example, your arms and legs. Peripheral neuropathy may cause pain, numbness and tingling in affected areas.
Myxedema. This rare, life-threatening condition is the result of long-term, undiagnosed hypothyroidism. Its signs and symptoms include intense cold intolerance and drowsiness followed by profound lethargy and unconsciousness.
A myxedema coma may be triggered by sedatives, infection or other stress on your body. If you have signs or symptoms of myxedema, you need immediate emergency medical treatment.
Infertility. Low levels of thyroid hormone can interfere with ovulation, which impairs fertility. In addition, some of the causes of hypothyroidism — such as autoimmune disorder — can also impair fertility.
Birth defects. Babies born to women with untreated thyroid disease may have a higher risk of birth defects compared to babies born to healthy mothers. These children are also more prone to serious intellectual and developmental problems.
Infants with untreated hypothyroidism present at birth are at risk of serious problems with both physical and mental development. But if this condition is diagnosed within the first few months of life, the chances of normal development are excellent.
Symptoms of an ice cream headache include: Sharp, stabbing pain in the forehead, Pain that peaks about 20 to 60 seconds after it begins and goes away in about the same time, Pain that rarely lasts longer than five minutes.
Because ice cream headaches quickly go away, there's no need to see a doctor.
Ice cream headaches are caused either by exposing your head to sudden, extreme cold or by having something cold move across the roof of your mouth and the back of your throat, such as when you eat ice cream quickly or gulp a cold drink. Scientists are unsure about the exact mechanism that causes this pain.
One theory is that the cold temporarily alters blood flow in your nervous system, causing a brief headache. Blood vessels constrict to prevent the loss of body heat and then relax again to let blood flow rise, resulting in a burst of pain that goes away once the body adapts to the temperature change.
Ice cream headaches can affect anyone. But you might be more susceptible to ice cream headaches or have more-severe ice cream headaches if you're prone to migraines.
Ichthyosis vulgaris slows your skin's natural shedding process. This causes chronic, excessive buildup of the protein in the upper layer of the skin (keratin). Symptoms include: Dry, scaly skin, Tile-like, small scales, Scales colored white, dirty gray or brown — with darker-colored scales typically on darker skin, Flaky scalp, Deep, painful cracks in your skin.
The scales usually appear on your elbows and lower legs and may be especially thick and dark over your shins. Most cases of ichthyosis vulgaris are mild, but some can be severe. The severity of symptoms may vary widely among family members who have the condition.
Symptoms usually worsen or are more pronounced in cold, dry environments and tend to improve or even resolve in warm, humid environments.
If you suspect you or your child has ichthyosis vulgaris, talk to your family doctor or a dermatologist. He or she can diagnose the condition by examining the characteristic scales.
Also be sure to seek medical advice if the symptoms worsen or don't improve with self-care measures. You may need stronger medication to manage the condition.
Ichthyosis vulgaris is commonly caused by a genetic mutation that's inherited from one or both parents. Children who inherit a defective gene from just one parent have a milder form of the disease. Those who inherit two defective genes have a more severe form of ichthyosis vulgaris. Children with the inherited form of the disorder usually have normal skin at birth, but develop scaling and roughness during the first few years of life.
If genetic abnormalities aren't responsible for ichthyosis, it's referred to as acquired ichthyosis. It's usually associated with other diseases, such as cancer, thyroid disease or HIV/AIDS.
Some people with ichthyosis may experience:
Overheating. In rare cases, the skin thickness and scales of ichthyosis can interfere with sweating. This can inhibit cooling. In some people, excess sweating (hyperhidrosis) can occur.
Secondary infection. Skin splitting and cracking may lead to infections.
IgA nephropathy usually doesn't cause symptoms in the early stages, so the disease can go unnoticed for years or decades. It's sometimes suspected when routine tests reveal protein and red blood cells in your urine that can't be seen without a microscope (microscopic hematuria).
Signs and symptoms of IgA nephropathy include: Cola- or tea-colored urine (caused by red blood cells in the urine), Repeated episodes of cola- or tea-colored urine, and sometimes visible blood in your urine, usually during or after an upper respiratory or other infection and sometimes after strenuous exercise, Foamy urine from protein leaking into your urine (proteinuria), Pain in the one or both sides of your back below your ribs, Swelling (edema) in your hands and feet, High blood pressure.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you see blood in your urine. Urinary bleeding can have a number of causes, but prolonged or repeated bleeding might indicate a serious medical problem. Also see your doctor if you develop sudden swelling in your hands and feet.
Your kidneys are two bean-shaped, fist-sized organs situated at the small of your back, one on each side of your spine. Each kidney contains tiny blood vessels that filter waste, excess water and other substances from your blood as they pass through your kidneys. The filtered blood reenters your bloodstream, while the waste material passes into your bladder and out of your body when you urinate.
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) is an antibody that plays a key role in your immune system by attacking invading pathogens and fighting infections. But in IgA nephropathy, this antibody collects in the glomeruli, causing inflammation (glomerulonephritis) and gradually affecting their filtering ability.
Researchers don't know exactly what causes IgA deposits in the kidneys, but the following might be associated:
Genes. IgA nephropathy is more common in some families and in certain ethnic groups.
Liver diseases. These include cirrhosis, a condition in which scar tissue replaces normal tissue within the liver, and chronic hepatitis B and C infections.
Celiac disease. Eating gluten, a protein found in most grains, triggers this digestive condition.
Infections. These include HIV and some bacterial infections.
Although the exact cause of IgA nephropathy is unknown, these factors might increase your risk of developing this condition:
Sex. In North America and Western Europe, IgA nephropathy affects at least twice as many men as it does women.
Ethnicity. IgA nephropathy is more common in whites and Asians than it is in blacks.
Age. IgA nephropathy most often develops between the late teens and late 30s.
Family history. In some cases, IgA nephropathy appears to run in families, indicating that genetic factors contribute to the disease.
The course of IgA nephropathy varies from person to person. Some people have the disease for years with few or no problems. In fact, many cases go undiagnosed. Other people develop one or more of the following complications:
High blood pressure. Damage to your kidneys from IgA deposits can raise your blood pressure, and high blood pressure can cause further damage to your kidneys.
High cholesterol. High levels of cholesterol can increase your risk of a heart attack.
Acute kidney failure. If your kidneys lose their filtering ability due to IgA deposits, waste products build up quickly in your blood.
Chronic kidney disease. IgA nephropathy can cause your kidneys to gradually stop functioning. Then permanent dialysis or a kidney transplant is needed to live.
Nephrotic syndrome. This is a group of problems that can be caused by damage to the glomeruli, including high urine protein levels, low blood protein levels, high cholesterol and lipids, and swelling of your eyelids, feet and abdomen.
Symptoms of illness anxiety disorder involve preoccupation with the idea that you're seriously ill, based on normal body sensations (such as a noisy stomach) or minor signs (such as a minor rash). Signs and symptoms may include: Being preoccupied with having or getting a serious disease or health condition, Worrying that minor symptoms or body sensations mean you have a serious illness, Being easily alarmed about your health status, Finding little or no reassurance from doctor visits or negative test results, Worrying excessively about a specific medical condition or your risk of developing a medical condition because it runs in your family, Having so much distress about possible illnesses that it's hard for you to function, Repeatedly checking your body for signs of illness or disease, Frequently making medical appointments for reassurance — or avoiding medical care for fear of being diagnosed with a serious illness, Avoiding people, places or activities for fear of health risks, Constantly talking about your health and possible illnesses, Frequently searching the internet for causes of symptoms or possible illnesses.
Because symptoms can be related to health problems, it's important to be evaluated by your primary care provider if this hasn't already been done. If your provider believes that you may have illness anxiety disorder, he or she may refer you to a mental health professional.
Significant health anxiety can cause real distress for the person, and reassurance isn't always helpful. Sometimes, providing reassurance can make things worse. This can be frustrating and cause stress on families and relationships. Encourage your loved one to consider a mental health referral to learn ways to cope with illness anxiety disorder.
The exact cause of illness anxiety disorder isn't clear, but these factors may play a role:
Beliefs. You may have a difficult time tolerating uncertainty over uncomfortable or unusual body sensations. This could lead you to misinterpret that all body sensations are serious, so you search for evidence to confirm that you have a serious disease.
Family. You may be more likely to have health anxiety if you had parents who worried too much about their own health or your health.
Past experience. You may have had experience with serious illness in childhood, so physical sensations may be frightening to you.
Illness anxiety disorder usually begins in early or middle adulthood and may get worse with age. Often for older individuals, health-related anxiety may focus on the fear of losing their memory.
Risk factors for illness anxiety disorder may include: A time of major life stress, Threat of a serious illness that turns out not to be serious, History of abuse as a child, A serious childhood illness or a parent with a serious illness, Personality traits, such as having a tendency toward being a worrier, Excessive health-related internet use.
Illness anxiety disorder may be associated with: Relationship or family problems because excessive worrying can frustrate others, Work-related performance problems or excessive absences, Problems functioning in daily life, possibly even resulting in disability, Financial problems due to excessive health care visits and medical bills, Having another mental health disorder, such as somatic symptom disorder, other anxiety disorders, depression or a personality disorder.
Immune thrombocytopenia may have no signs and symptoms. When they do occur, they may include: Easy or excessive bruising, Superficial bleeding into the skin that appears as pinpoint-sized reddish-purple spots (petechiae) that look like a rash, usually on the lower legs, Bleeding from the gums or nose, Blood in urine or stools, Unusually heavy menstrual flow.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you or your child develops warning signs that worry you. Bleeding that won't stop is a medical emergency. Seek immediate help if you or your child experiences bleeding that can't be controlled by the usual first-aid techniques, such as applying pressure to the area.
Immune thrombocytopenia usually happens when your immune system mistakenly attacks and destroys platelets, which are cell fragments that help blood clot. In adults, this may be triggered by infection with HIV, hepatitis or H. pylori — the type of bacteria that causes stomach ulcers. In most children with ITP, the disorder follows a viral illness, such as the mumps or the flu.
ITP is more common among young women. The risk appears to be higher in people who also have diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus and antiphospholipid syndrome.
A rare complication of immune thrombocytopenia is bleeding into the brain, which can be fatal.
If you're pregnant and your platelet count is very low or you have bleeding, you have a greater risk of heavy bleeding during delivery. Your doctor may suggest treatment to maintain a stable platelet count, taking into account the effects on your baby.
Impacted wisdom teeth don't always cause symptoms. However, when an impacted wisdom tooth becomes infected, damages other teeth or causes other dental problems, you may experience some of these signs or symptoms: Red or swollen gums, Tender or bleeding gums, Jaw pain, Swelling around the jaw, Bad breath, An unpleasant taste in your mouth, Difficulty opening your mouth.
See your dentist if you experience symptoms in the area behind your last molar that may be associated with an impacted wisdom tooth.
Wisdom teeth (third molars) become impacted because they don't have enough room to come in (erupt) or develop normally.
Wisdom teeth usually emerge sometime between the ages of 17 and 25. Some people have wisdom teeth that emerge without any problems and line up with the other teeth behind the second molars. In many cases, however, the mouth is too crowded for third molars to develop normally. These crowded third molars become trapped (impacted).
An impacted wisdom tooth may partially emerge so that some of the crown is visible (partially impacted), or it may never break through the gums (fully impacted). Whether partially or fully impacted, the tooth may: Grow at an angle toward the next tooth (second molar), Grow at an angle toward the back of the mouth, Grow at a right angle to the other teeth, as if the wisdom tooth is "lying down" within the jawbone, Grow straight up or down like other teeth but stay trapped within the jawbone.
Impacted wisdom teeth can cause several problems in the mouth:
Damage to other teeth. If the wisdom tooth pushes against the second molar, it may damage the second molar or increase the risk of infection in that area. This pressure can also cause problems with crowding of the other teeth or require orthodontic treatment to straighten other teeth.
Cysts. The wisdom tooth develops in a sac within the jawbone. The sac can fill with fluid, forming a cyst that can damage the jawbone, teeth and nerves. Rarely, a tumor — usually noncancerous (benign) — develops. This complication may require removal of tissue and bone.
Decay. Partially impacted wisdom teeth appear to be at higher risk of tooth decay (caries) than other teeth. This probably occurs because wisdom teeth are harder to clean and because food and bacteria get easily trapped between the gum and a partially erupted tooth.
Gum disease. The difficulty cleaning impacted, partially erupted wisdom teeth increases the risk of developing a painful, inflammatory gum condition called pericoronitis (per-ih-kor-o-NI-tis) in that area.
Classic signs and symptoms of impetigo involve red sores that quickly rupture, ooze for a few days and then form a yellowish-brown crust. The sores usually occur around the nose and mouth but can be spread to other areas of the body by fingers, clothing and towels. Itching and soreness are generally mild.
A less common form of the disorder, called bullous impetigo, may feature larger blisters that occur on the trunk of infants and young children.
A more serious form of impetigo, called ecthyma, penetrates deeper into the skin — causing painful fluid- or pus-filled sores that turn into deep ulcers.
If you suspect that you or your child has impetigo, consult your family doctor, your child's pediatrician or a dermatologist.
You're exposed to the bacteria that cause impetigo when you come into contact with the sores of someone who's infected or with items they've touched — such as clothing, bed linen, towels and even toys.
Factors that increase the risk of impetigo include:
Age. Impetigo most commonly occurs in children ages 2 to 5.
Crowded conditions. Impetigo spreads easily in schools and child care settings.
Warm, humid weather. Impetigo infections are more common in summer.
Certain sports. Participation in sports that involve skin-to-skin contact, such as football or wrestling, increases your risk of developing impetigo.
Broken skin. The bacteria that cause impetigo often enter your skin through a small skin injury, insect bite or rash.
Adults and people with diabetes or a weakened immune system are more likely to develop ecthyma.
Impetigo typically isn't dangerous. And the sores in mild forms of the infection generally heal without scarring.
Rarely, complications of impetigo include:
Cellulitis. This potentially serious infection affects the tissues underlying your skin and eventually may spread to your lymph nodes and bloodstream. Untreated cellulitis can quickly become life-threatening.
Kidney problems. One of the types of bacteria that cause impetigo can also damage your kidneys.
Scarring. The ulcers associated with ecthyma can leave scars.
If you have an incompetent cervix, you may not have any signs or symptoms during early pregnancy. Some women have mild discomfort or spotting over the course of several days or weeks starting between 14 and 20 weeks of pregnancy.
Be on the lookout for: A sensation of pelvic pressure, A new backache, Mild abdominal cramps, A change in vaginal discharge, Light vaginal bleeding.
Many women don't have a known risk factor. Risk factors for cervical insufficiency include:
Cervical trauma. Some surgical procedures used to treat cervical abnormalities associated with an abnormal Pap smear can result in cervical insufficiency. Other surgical procedures such as a D&C could also be associated with cervical insufficiency. Rarely, a cervical tear during a previous labor and delivery could be associated with an incompetent cervix.
Race. Black women seem to have a higher risk of developing cervical insufficiency. It isn't clear why.
Congenital conditions. Uterine abnormalities and genetic disorders affecting a fibrous type of protein that makes up your body's connective tissues (collagen) might cause an incompetent cervix. Exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES), a synthetic form of the hormone estrogen, before birth also has been linked to cervical insufficiency.
An incompetent cervix poses risks for your pregnancy — particularly during the second trimester — including: Premature birth, Pregnancy loss.
People with indigestion may have one or more of the following symptoms:
Early fullness during a meal. You haven't eaten much of your meal, but you already feel full and may not be able to finish eating.
Uncomfortable fullness after a meal. Fullness lasts longer than it should.
Discomfort in the upper abdomen. You feel a mild to severe pain in the area between the bottom of your breastbone and your navel.
Burning in the upper abdomen. You feel an uncomfortable heat or burning sensation between the bottom of your breastbone and your navel.
Bloating in the upper abdomen. You feel an uncomfortable sensation of tightness due to a buildup of gas.
Nausea. You feel as though you want to vomit.
Less frequent symptoms include vomiting and belching.
Sometimes people with indigestion also experience heartburn, but heartburn and indigestion are two separate conditions. Heartburn is a pain or burning feeling in the center of your chest that may radiate into your neck or back during or after eating.
Mild indigestion is usually nothing to worry about. Consult your doctor if discomfort persists for more than two weeks. Contact your doctor right away if pain is severe or accompanied by: Unintentional weight loss or loss of appetite, Repeated vomiting or vomiting with blood, Black, tarry stools, Trouble swallowing that gets progressively worse, Fatigue or weakness, which may indicate anemia.
Seek immediate medical attention if you have: Shortness of breath, sweating or chest pain radiating to the jaw, neck or arm, Chest pain on exertion or with stress.
Indigestion has many possible causes. Often, indigestion is related to lifestyle and may be triggered by food, drink or medication. Common causes of indigestion include: Overeating or eating too quickly, Fatty, greasy or spicy foods, Too much caffeine, alcohol, chocolate or carbonated beverages, Smoking, Anxiety, Certain antibiotics, pain relievers and iron supplements.
Sometimes indigestion is caused by other digestive conditions, including: Inflammation of the stomach (gastritis), Peptic ulcers, Celiac disease, Gallstones, Constipation, Pancreas inflammation (pancreatitis), Stomach cancer, Intestinal blockage, Reduced blood flow in the intestine (intestinal ischemia).
Indigestion with no obvious cause is known as functional or nonulcer dyspepsia.
Although indigestion doesn't usually have serious complications, it can affect your quality of life by making you feel uncomfortable and causing you to eat less. You might miss work or school because of your symptoms. When indigestion is caused by an underlying condition, that condition can also have its own complications.
Yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes — the main sign of infant jaundice — usually appears between the second and fourth day after birth.
To check for infant jaundice, press gently on your baby's forehead or nose. If the skin looks yellow where you pressed, it's likely your baby has mild jaundice. If your baby doesn't have jaundice, the skin color should simply look slightly lighter than its normal color for a moment.
Examine your baby in good lighting conditions, preferably in natural daylight.
Most hospitals have a policy of examining babies for jaundice before discharge. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that newborns be examined for jaundice during routine medical checks and at least every eight to 12 hours while in the hospital.
Your baby should be examined for jaundice between the third and seventh day after birth, when bilirubin levels usually peak. If your baby is discharged earlier than 72 hours after birth, make a follow-up appointment to look for jaundice within two days of discharge.
The following signs or symptoms may indicate severe jaundice or complications from excess bilirubin. Call your doctor if: Your baby's skin becomes more yellow, The skin on your baby's the abdomen, arms or legs looks yellow, The whites of your baby's eyes look yellow, Your baby seems listless or sick or is difficult to awaken, Your baby isn't gaining weight or is feeding poorly, Your baby makes high-pitched cries, Your baby develops any other signs or symptoms that concern you.
Excess bilirubin (hyperbilirubinemia) is the main cause of jaundice. Bilirubin, which is responsible for the yellow color of jaundice, is a normal part of the pigment released from the breakdown of "used" red blood cells.
Newborns produce more bilirubin than adults do because of greater production and faster breakdown of red blood cells in the first few days of life. Normally, the liver filters bilirubin from the bloodstream and releases it into the intestinal tract. A newborn's immature liver often can't remove bilirubin quickly enough, causing an excess of bilirubin. Jaundice due to these normal newborn conditions is called physiologic jaundice, and it typically appears on the second or third day of life.
An underlying disorder may cause infant jaundice. In these cases, jaundice often appears much earlier or much later than does the more common form of infant jaundice. Diseases or conditions that can cause jaundice include: Internal bleeding (hemorrhage), An infection in your baby's blood (sepsis), Other viral or bacterial infections, An incompatibility between the mother's blood and the baby's blood, A liver malfunction, Biliary atresia, a condition in which the baby’s bile ducts are blocked or scarred, An enzyme deficiency, An abnormality of your baby's red blood cells that causes them to break down rapidly.
Major risk factors for jaundice, particularly severe jaundice that can cause complications, include:
Premature birth. A baby born before 38 weeks of gestation may not be able to process bilirubin as quickly as full-term babies do. Premature babies also may feed less and have fewer bowel movements, resulting in less bilirubin eliminated through stool.
Significant bruising during birth. Newborns who become bruised during delivery gets bruises from the delivery may have higher levels of bilirubin from the breakdown of more red blood cells.
Blood type. If the mother's blood type is different from her baby's, the baby may have received antibodies through the placenta that cause abnormally rapid breakdown of red blood cells.
Breast-feeding. Breast-fed babies, particularly those who have difficulty nursing or getting enough nutrition from breast-feeding, are at higher risk of jaundice. Dehydration or a low caloric intake may contribute to the onset of jaundice. However, because of the benefits of breast-feeding, experts still recommend it. It's important to make sure your baby gets enough to eat and is adequately hydrated.
Race. Studies show that babies of East Asian ancestry have an increased risk of developing jaundice.
High levels of bilirubin that cause severe jaundice can result in serious complications if not treated.
Bilirubin is toxic to cells of the brain. If a baby has severe jaundice, there's a risk of bilirubin passing into the brain, a condition called acute bilirubin encephalopathy. Prompt treatment may prevent significant lasting damage.
Signs of acute bilirubin encephalopathy in a baby with jaundice include: Listlessness, Difficulty waking, High-pitched crying, Poor sucking or feeding, Backward arching of the neck and body, Fever.
Kernicterus is the syndrome that occurs if acute bilirubin encephalopathy causes permanent damage to the brain. Kernicterus may result in: Involuntary and uncontrolled movements (athetoid cerebral palsy), Permanent upward gaze, Hearing loss, Improper development of tooth enamel.
Infant reflux generally isn't a cause for concern. It's very unusual for the stomach contents to have enough acid to irritate the throat or esophagus and to cause signs and symptoms.
See your baby's doctor if your baby: Isn't gaining weight, Consistently spits up forcefully, causing stomach contents to shoot out of his or her mouth (projectile vomiting), Spits up green or yellow fluid, Spits up blood or a material that looks like coffee grounds, Refuses food, Has blood in his or her stool, Has difficulty breathing or a chronic cough, Begins spitting up at age 6 months or older, Is unusually irritable after eating.
Some of these signs can indicate possibly serious but treatable conditions, such as GERD or a blockage in the digestive tract.
In infants, the ring of muscle between the esophagus and the stomach — the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) — is not yet fully mature. That allows stomach contents to flow backward. Eventually, the LES will open only when your baby swallows and will remain tightly closed at other times, keeping stomach contents where they belong.
The factors that contribute to infant reflux are common in babies and often can't be avoided. These factors include: Babies lying flat most of the time, An almost completely liquid diet, Babies being born prematurely.
Occasionally, infant reflux can be caused by more-serious conditions, such as:
GERD. The reflux has enough acid to irritate and damage the lining of the esophagus.
Pyloric stenosis. A valve between the stomach and the small intestine is narrowed, preventing stomach contents from emptying into the small intestine.
Food intolerance. A protein in cow's milk is the most common trigger.
Eosinophilic esophagitis. A certain type of white blood cell (eosinophil) builds up and injures the lining of the esophagus.
Infant reflux usually clears up by itself without causing problems for your baby.
If your baby has a more-serious condition such as GERD, he or she might show signs of poor growth. Some research indicates that babies who have frequent episodes of spitting up may be more likely to develop GERD during later childhood.
Each infectious disease has its own specific signs and symptoms. General signs and symptoms common to a number of infectious diseases include: Fever, Diarrhea, Fatigue, Muscle aches, Coughing.
Seek medical attention if you: Have been bitten by an animal, Are having trouble breathing, Have been coughing for more than a week, Have severe headache with fever, Experience a rash or swelling, Have unexplained or prolonged fever, Have sudden vision problems.
Infectious diseases can be caused by:
Bacteria. These one-cell organisms are responsible for illnesses such as strep throat, urinary tract infections and tuberculosis.
Viruses. Even smaller than bacteria, viruses cause a multitude of diseases ranging from the common cold to AIDS.
Fungi. Many skin diseases, such as ringworm and athlete's foot, are caused by fungi. Other types of fungi can infect your lungs or nervous system.
Parasites. Malaria is caused by a tiny parasite that is transmitted by a mosquito bite. Other parasites may be transmitted to humans from animal feces.
An easy way to catch most infectious diseases is by coming in contact with a person or an animal with the infection. Infectious diseases can be spread through direct contact such as:
Person to person. Infectious diseases commonly spread through the direct transfer of bacteria, viruses or other germs from one person to another. This can happen when an individual with the bacterium or virus touches, kisses, or coughs or sneezes on someone who isn't infected.
These germs can also spread through the exchange of body fluids from sexual contact. The person who passes the germ may have no symptoms of the disease, but may simply be a carrier.
Animal to person. Being bitten or scratched by an infected animal — even a pet — can make you sick and, in extreme circumstances, can be fatal. Handling animal waste can be hazardous, too. For example, you can get a toxoplasmosis infection by scooping your cat's litter box.
Mother to unborn child. A pregnant woman may pass germs that cause infectious diseases to her unborn baby. Some germs can pass through the placenta or through breast milk. Germs in the vagina can also be transmitted to the baby during birth.
Disease-causing organisms also can be passed by indirect contact. Many germs can linger on an inanimate object, such as a tabletop, doorknob or faucet handle.
When you touch a doorknob handled by someone ill with the flu or a cold, for example, you can pick up the germs he or she left behind. If you then touch your eyes, mouth or nose before washing your hands, you may become infected.
Some germs rely on insect carriers — such as mosquitoes, fleas, lice or ticks — to move from host to host. These carriers are known as vectors. Mosquitoes can carry the malaria parasite or West Nile virus. Deer ticks may carry the bacterium that causes Lyme disease.
Disease-causing germs can also infect you through contaminated food and water. This mechanism of transmission allows germs to be spread to many people through a single source. Escherichia coli (E. coli), for example, is a bacterium present in or on certain foods — such as undercooked hamburger or unpasteurized fruit juice.
While anyone can catch infectious diseases, you may be more likely to get sick if your immune system isn't working properly. This may occur if: You're taking steroids or other medications that suppress your immune system, such as anti-rejection drugs for a transplanted organ, You have HIV or AIDS, You have certain types of cancer or other disorders that affect your immune system.
In addition, certain other medical conditions may predispose you to infection, including implanted medical devices, malnutrition and extremes of age, among others.
Most infectious diseases have only minor complications. But some infections — such as pneumonia, AIDS and meningitis — can become life-threatening. A few types of infections have been linked to a long-term increased risk of cancer: Human papillomavirus is linked to cervical cancer, Helicobacter pylori is linked to stomach cancer and peptic ulcers, Hepatitis B and C have been linked to liver cancer.
In addition, some infectious diseases may become silent, only to appear again in the future — sometimes even decades later. For example, someone who's had chickenpox may develop shingles much later in life.
The main symptom of infertility is not getting pregnant. There may be no other obvious symptoms. Sometimes, a woman with infertility may have irregular or absent menstrual periods. In some cases, a man with infertility may have some signs of hormonal problems, such as changes in hair growth or sexual function.
Most couples will eventually conceive, with or without treatment.
You probably don't need to see a doctor about infertility unless you have been trying regularly to get pregnant for at least one year. Women should talk with a doctor earlier, however, if they: Are age 35 or older and have been trying to conceive for six months or longer, Are over age 40, Have irregular or absent periods, Have very painful periods, Have known fertility problems, Have been diagnosed with endometriosis or pelvic inflammatory disease, Have had multiple miscarriages, Have undergone treatment for cancer.
Men should talk to a doctor if they have: A low sperm count or other problems with sperm, A history of testicular, prostate or sexual problems, Undergone treatment for cancer, Small testicles or swelling in the scrotum, Others in your family with infertility problems.
All of the steps during ovulation and fertilization need to happen correctly in order to get pregnant. Sometimes the issues that cause infertility in couples are present at birth, and sometimes they develop later in life.
Infertility causes can affect one or both partners. In general: In about one-third of cases, there is an issue with the man, In about one-third of cases, there is an issue with the woman, In the remaining cases, there are issues with both the man and the woman, or no cause can be found.
These may include:
Abnormal sperm production or function due to undescended testicles, genetic defects, health problems such as diabetes, or infections such as chlamydia, gonorrhea, mumps or HIV. Enlarged veins in the testes (varicocele) also can affect the quality of sperm.
Problems with the delivery of sperm due to sexual problems, such as premature ejaculation; certain genetic diseases, such as cystic fibrosis; structural problems, such as a blockage in the testicle; or damage or injury to the reproductive organs.
Overexposure to certain environmental factors, such as pesticides and other chemicals, and radiation. Cigarette smoking, alcohol, marijuana, anabolic steroids, and taking medications to treat bacterial infections, high blood pressure and depression also can affect fertility. Frequent exposure to heat, such as in saunas or hot tubs, can raise body temperature and may affect sperm production.
Damage related to cancer and its treatment, including radiation or chemotherapy. Treatment for cancer can impair sperm production, sometimes severely.
Causes of female infertility may include:
Ovulation disorders, which affect the release of eggs from the ovaries. These include hormonal disorders such as polycystic ovary syndrome. Hyperprolactinemia, a condition in which you have too much prolactin — the hormone that stimulates breast milk production — also may interfere with ovulation. Either too much thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism) or too little (hypothyroidism) can affect the menstrual cycle or cause infertility. Other underlying causes may include too much exercise, eating disorders or tumors.
Uterine or cervical abnormalities, including abnormalities with the cervix, polyps in the uterus or the shape of the uterus. Noncancerous (benign) tumors in the uterine wall (uterine fibroids) may cause infertility by blocking the fallopian tubes or stopping a fertilized egg from implanting in the uterus.
Fallopian tube damage or blockage, often caused by inflammation of the fallopian tube (salpingitis). This can result from pelvic inflammatory disease, which is usually caused by a sexually transmitted infection, endometriosis or adhesions.
Endometriosis, which occurs when endometrial tissue grows outside of the uterus, may affect the function of the ovaries, uterus and fallopian tubes.
Primary ovarian insufficiency (early menopause), when the ovaries stop working and menstruation ends before age 40. Although the cause is often unknown, certain factors are associated with early menopause, including immune system diseases, certain genetic conditions such as Turner syndrome or carriers of Fragile X syndrome, and radiation or chemotherapy treatment.
Pelvic adhesions, bands of scar tissue that bind organs that can form after pelvic infection, appendicitis, endometriosis or abdominal or pelvic surgery.
Cancer and its treatment. Certain cancers — particularly reproductive cancers — often impair female fertility. Both radiation and chemotherapy may affect fertility.
Many of the risk factors for both male and female infertility are the same. They include:
Age. Women's fertility gradually declines with age, especially in the mid-30s, and it drops rapidly after age 37. Infertility in older women is likely due to the lower number and quality of eggs, and can also be due to health problems that affect fertility. Men over age 40 may be less fertile than younger men.
Tobacco use. Smoking tobacco or marijuana by either partner may reduce the likelihood of pregnancy. Smoking also reduces the possible effectiveness of fertility treatment. Miscarriages are more frequent in women who smoke. Smoking can increase the risk of erectile dysfunction and a low sperm count in men.
Alcohol use. For women, there's no safe level of alcohol use during conception or pregnancy. Alcohol use may contribute to infertility. For men, heavy alcohol use can decrease sperm count and motility.
Being overweight. Among American women, an inactive lifestyle and being overweight may increase the risk of infertility. For men, sperm count also may be affected by being overweight.
Being underweight. Women at risk of fertility problems include those with eating disorders, such as anorexia or bulimia, and those who follow a very low-calorie or restrictive diet.
Exercise issues. A lack of exercise contributes to obesity, which increases the risk of infertility. Less often, ovulation problems may be associated with frequent strenuous, intense exercise in women who are not overweight.
Inflammatory bowel disease symptoms vary, depending on the severity of inflammation and where it occurs. Symptoms may range from mild to severe. You are likely to have periods of active illness followed by periods of remission.
Signs and symptoms that are common to both Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis include: Diarrhea, Fever and fatigue, Abdominal pain and cramping, Blood in your stool, Reduced appetite, Unintended weight loss.
See your doctor if you experience a persistent change in your bowel habits or if you have any of the signs and symptoms of inflammatory bowel disease. Although inflammatory bowel disease usually isn't fatal, it's a serious disease that, in some cases, may cause life-threatening complications.
The exact cause of inflammatory bowel disease remains unknown. Previously, diet and stress were suspected, but now doctors know that these factors may aggravate but don't cause IBD.
One possible cause is an immune system malfunction. When your immune system tries to fight off an invading virus or bacterium, an abnormal immune response causes the immune system to attack the cells in the digestive tract, too. Heredity also seems to play a role in that IBD is more common in people who have family members with the disease. However, most people with IBD don't have this family history.
Age. Most people who develop IBD are diagnosed before they're 30 years old.  But some people don't develop the disease until their 50s or 60s.
Race or ethnicity. Although whites have the highest risk of the disease, it can occur in any race. If you're of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, your risk is even higher.
Family history. You're at higher risk if you have a close relative — such as a parent, sibling or child — with the disease.
Cigarette smoking. Cigarette smoking is the most important controllable risk factor for developing Crohn's disease. Although smoking may provide some protection against ulcerative colitis, the overall health benefits of not smoking make it important to try to quit.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications. These include ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen sodium (Aleve), diclofenac sodium (Voltaren) and others. These medications may increase the risk of developing IBD or worsen disease in people who have IBD.
Where you live. If you live in an industrialized country, you're more likely to develop IBD. Therefore, it may be that environmental factors, including a diet high in fat or refined foods, play a role. People living in northern climates also seem to be at greater risk.
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease have some complications in common and others that are specific to each condition. Complications found in both conditions may include:
Colon cancer. Having IBD increases your risk of colon cancer. General colon cancer screening guidelines for people without IBD call for a colonoscopy every 10 years beginning at age 50. Ask your doctor whether you need to have this test done sooner and more frequently.
Skin, eye and joint inflammation. Certain disorders, including arthritis, skin lesions and eye inflammation (uveitis), may occur during IBD flare-ups.
Medication side effects. Certain medications for IBD are associated with a small risk of developing certain cancers. Corticosteroids can be associated with a risk of osteoporosis, high blood pressure and other conditions.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis. In this condition, inflammation causes scars within the bile ducts, eventually making them narrow and gradually causing liver damage.
Blood clots. IBD increases the risk of blood clots in veins and arteries.
Complications of Crohn's disease may include:
Bowel obstruction. Crohn's disease affects the full thickness of the intestinal wall. Over time, parts of the bowel can thicken and narrow, which may block the flow of digestive contents. You may require surgery to remove the diseased portion of your bowel.
Malnutrition. Diarrhea, abdominal pain and cramping may make it difficult for you to eat or for your intestine to absorb enough nutrients to keep you nourished. It's also common to develop anemia due to low iron or vitamin B12 caused by the disease.
Ulcers. Chronic inflammation can lead to open sores (ulcers) anywhere in your digestive tract, including your mouth and anus, and in the genital area (perineum).
Fistulas. Sometimes ulcers can extend completely through the intestinal wall, creating a fistula — an abnormal connection between different body parts. Fistulas near or around the anal area (perianal) are the most common kind. In some cases, a fistula may become infected and form an abscess.
Anal fissure. This is a small tear in the tissue that lines the anus or in the skin around the anus where infections can occur. It's often associated with painful bowel movements and may lead to a perianal fistula.
Complications of ulcerative colitis may include:
Toxic megacolon. Ulcerative colitis may cause the colon to rapidly widen and swell, a serious condition known as toxic megacolon.
A hole in the colon (perforated colon). A perforated colon most commonly is caused by toxic megacolon, but it may also occur on its own.
Severe dehydration. Excessive diarrhea can result in dehydration.
Inflammatory breast cancer doesn't commonly form a lump, as occurs with other forms of breast cancer. Instead, signs and symptoms of inflammatory breast cancer include: Rapid change in the appearance of one breast, over the course of several weeks, Thickness, heaviness or visible enlargement of one breast, Discoloration, giving the breast a red, purple, pink or bruised appearance, Unusual warmth of the affected breast, Dimpling or ridges on the skin of the affected breast, similar to an orange peel, Tenderness, pain or aching, Enlarged lymph nodes under the arm, above the collarbone or below the collarbone, Flattening or turning inward of the nipple.
For inflammatory breast cancer to be diagnosed, these symptoms must have been present for less than six months.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice any signs or symptoms that worry you.
Other more common conditions have signs and symptoms resembling those of inflammatory breast cancer. A breast injury or breast infection (mastitis) may cause redness, swelling and pain.
Inflammatory breast cancer can be easily confused with a breast infection, which is much more common. It's reasonable and common to be initially treated with antibiotics for a week or more. If your symptoms respond to antibiotics, additional testing isn't necessary. But if the redness does not improve, your doctor may consider more serious causes of your symptoms, such as inflammatory breast cancer.
If you've been treated for a breast infection but your signs and symptoms persist, contact your doctor. Your doctor may recommend a mammogram or other test to evaluate your signs and symptoms. The only way to determine whether your symptoms are caused by inflammatory breast cancer is to do a biopsy to remove a sample of tissue for testing.
It's not clear what causes inflammatory breast cancer.
Doctors know that inflammatory breast cancer begins when a breast cell develops changes in its DNA. Most often the cell is located in one of the tubes (ducts) that carry breast milk to the nipple. But the cancer can also begin with a cell in the glandular tissue (lobules) where breast milk is produced.
A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The changes to the DNA tell the breast cell to grow and divide rapidly. The accumulating abnormal cells infiltrate and clog the lymphatic vessels in the skin of the breast. The blockage in the lymphatic vessels causes red, swollen and dimpled skin — a classic sign of inflammatory breast cancer.
Factors that increase the risk of inflammatory breast cancer include:
Being a woman. Women are more likely to be diagnosed with inflammatory breast cancer than are men — but men can develop inflammatory breast cancer, too.
Being younger. Inflammatory breast cancer is more frequently diagnosed in people in their 40s and 50s.
Being black. Black women have a higher risk of inflammatory breast cancer than do white women.
Being obese. People who are obese have a greater risk of inflammatory breast cancer compared with those of normal weight.
At first, the flu may seem like a common cold with a runny nose, sneezing and sore throat. But colds usually develop slowly, whereas the flu tends to come on suddenly. And although a cold can be a bother, you usually feel much worse with the flu.
Common signs and symptoms of the flu include: Fever, Aching muscles, Chills and sweats, Headache, Dry, persistent cough, Shortness of breath, Tiredness and weakness, Runny or stuffy nose, Sore throat, Eye pain, Vomiting and diarrhea, but this is more common in children than adults.
Most people who get the flu can treat themselves at home and often don't need to see a doctor.
If you have flu symptoms and are at risk of complications, see your doctor right away. Taking antiviral drugs may reduce the length of your illness and help prevent more-serious problems.
If you have emergency signs and symptoms of the flu, get medical care right away. For adults, emergency signs and symptoms can include: Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, Chest pain, Ongoing dizziness, Seizures, Worsening of existing medical conditions, Severe weakness or muscle pain.
Emergency signs and symptoms in children can include: Difficulty breathing, Blue lips, Chest pain, Dehydration, Severe muscle pain, Seizures, Worsening of existing medical conditions.
Influenza viruses travel through the air in droplets when someone with the infection coughs, sneezes or talks. You can inhale the droplets directly, or you can pick up the germs from an object — such as a telephone or computer keyboard — and then transfer them to your eyes, nose or mouth.
People with the virus are likely contagious from about a day before symptoms appear until about five days after they start. Children and people with weakened immune systems may be contagious for a slightly longer time.
Influenza viruses are constantly changing, with new strains appearing regularly. If you've had influenza in the past, your body has already made antibodies to fight that specific strain of the virus. If future influenza viruses are similar to those you've encountered before, either by having the disease or by getting vaccinated, those antibodies may prevent infection or lessen its severity. But antibody levels may decline over time.
Also, antibodies against influenza viruses you've encountered in the past may not protect you from new influenza strains that can be very different viruses from what you had before.
Factors that may increase your risk of developing the flu or its complications include:
Age. Seasonal influenza tends to target children 6 months to 5 years old, and adults 65 years old or older.
Living or working conditions. People who live or work in facilities with many other residents, such as nursing homes or military barracks, are more likely to develop the flu. People who are staying in the hospital are also at higher risk.
Weakened immune system. Cancer treatments, anti-rejection drugs, long-term use of steroids, organ transplant, blood cancer or HIV/AIDS can weaken your immune system. This can make it easier for you to catch the flu and may also increase your risk of developing complications.
Chronic illnesses. Chronic conditions, including lung diseases such as asthma, diabetes, heart disease, nervous system diseases, metabolic disorders, an airway abnormality, and kidney, liver or blood disease, may increase your risk of influenza complications.
Race. Native American people may have an increased risk of influenza complications.
Aspirin use under age 19. People who are younger than 19 years of age and receiving long-term aspirin therapy are at risk of developing Reye's syndrome if infected with influenza.
Pregnancy. Pregnant women are more likely to develop influenza complications, particularly in the second and third trimesters. Women are more likely to develop influenza-related complications up to two weeks after delivering their babies.
Obesity. People with a body mass index (BMI) of 40 or more have an increased risk of flu complications.
If you're young and healthy, the flu usually isn't serious. Although you may feel miserable while you have it, the flu usually goes away in a week or two with no lasting effects. But children and adults at high risk may develop complications that may include: Pneumonia, Bronchitis, Asthma flare-ups, Heart problems, Ear infections, Acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Pneumonia is one of the most serious complications. For older adults and people with a chronic illness, pneumonia can be deadly.
Ingrown hairs most commonly appear in the beard area, including the chin and cheeks and, especially, the neck. They can appear on the scalp in those who shave their heads. Other common areas for ingrown hairs are the armpits, pubic area and legs.
Signs and symptoms include: Small, solid, rounded bumps (papules), Small, pus-filled, blister-like lesions (pustules), Skin darkening (hyperpigmentation), Pain, Itching, Embedded hairs.
An occasional ingrown hair isn't cause for alarm. See your doctor if your ingrown hairs are a chronic condition.
Hair structure and direction of growth play a role in ingrown hairs. A curved hair follicle, which produces tightly curled hair, is believed to encourage the hair to re-enter the skin once the hair is cut and starts to grow back. Shaving creates sharp edges in this type of hair, especially if the hair is dry when shaved.
You might also get an ingrown hair if you: Pull your skin taut during shaving — which allows the cut hair to draw back into the skin and re-enter the skin without first growing out, Tweeze — which also can leave a hair fragment under the skin surface.
When a hair penetrates your skin, your skin reacts as it would to a foreign body — it becomes inflamed.
Having tightly curled hair is the main risk factor for ingrown hairs.
Chronic ingrown hairs can lead to: Bacterial infection (from scratching), Skin darkening (hyperpigmentation), Permanent scarring (keloids), Pseudofolliculitis barbae, also known as razor bumps.
Ingrown toenail symptoms include: Pain and tenderness in your toe along one or both sides of the nail, Redness around your toenail, Swelling of your toe around the nail, Infection of the tissue around your toenail.
See your doctor if you: Experience severe discomfort in your toe or pus or redness that seems to be spreading, Have diabetes or another condition that causes poor blood flow to your feet and you experience any foot sore or infection.
Common ingrown toenail causes include: Wearing shoes that crowd your toenails, Cutting your toenails too short or not straight across, Injuring your toenail, Having unusually curved toenails.
Left untreated or undetected, an ingrown toenail can infect the underlying bone and lead to a serious bone infection.
Complications can be especially severe if you have diabetes, which can cause poor blood flow and damage nerves in your feet. So a minor foot injury — a cut, scrape, corn, callus or ingrown toenail — may not heal properly and become infected. A difficult-to-heal open sore (foot ulcer) may require surgery to prevent the decay and death of tissue (gangrene). Gangrene results from an interruption in blood flow to an area of your body.
Inguinal hernia signs and symptoms include: A bulge in the area on either side of your pubic bone, which becomes more obvious when you're upright, especially if you cough or strain, A burning or aching sensation at the bulge, Pain or discomfort in your groin, especially when bending over, coughing or lifting, A heavy or dragging sensation in your groin, Weakness or pressure in your groin, Occasionally, pain and swelling around the testicles when the protruding intestine descends into the scrotum.
Inguinal hernias in newborns and children result from a weakness in the abdominal wall that's present at birth. Sometimes the hernia will be visible only when an infant is crying, coughing or straining during a bowel movement. He or she might be irritable and have less appetite than usual.
In an older child, a hernia is likely to be more apparent when the child coughs, strains during a bowel movement or stands for a long period.
If you aren't able to push the hernia in, the contents of the hernia may be trapped (incarcerated) in the abdominal wall. An incarcerated hernia can become strangulated, which cuts off the blood flow to the tissue that's trapped. A strangulated hernia can be life-threatening if it isn't treated.
Signs and symptoms of a strangulated hernia include: Nausea, vomiting or both, Fever, Sudden pain that quickly intensifies, A hernia bulge that turns red, purple or dark, Inability to move your bowels or pass gas.
Seek immediate care if a hernia bulge turns red, purple or dark or if you notice any other signs or symptoms of a strangulated hernia.
See your doctor if you have a painful or noticeable bulge in your groin on either side of your pubic bone. The bulge is likely to be more noticeable when you're standing, and you usually can feel it if you put your hand directly over the affected area.
Some inguinal hernias have no apparent cause. Others might occur as a result of: Increased pressure within the abdomen, A pre-existing weak spot in the abdominal wall, Straining during bowel movements or urination, Strenuous activity, Pregnancy, Chronic coughing or sneezing.
In many people, the abdominal wall weakness that leads to an inguinal hernia occurs at birth when the abdominal lining (peritoneum) doesn't close properly. Other inguinal hernias develop later in life when muscles weaken or deteriorate due to aging, strenuous physical activity or coughing that accompanies smoking.
Weaknesses can also occur in the abdominal wall later in life, especially after an injury or abdominal surgery.
In men, the weak spot usually occurs in the inguinal canal, where the spermatic cord enters the scrotum. In women, the inguinal canal carries a ligament that helps hold the uterus in place, and hernias sometimes occur where connective tissue from the uterus attaches to tissue surrounding the pubic bone.
Factors that contribute to developing an inguinal hernia include:
Being male. Men are eight times more likely to develop an inguinal hernia than are women.
Being older. Muscles weaken as you age.
Being white.
Family history. You have a close relative, such as a parent or sibling, who has the condition.
Chronic cough, such as from smoking.
Chronic constipation. Constipation causes straining during bowel movements.
Pregnancy. Being pregnant can weaken the abdominal muscles and cause increased pressure inside your abdomen.
Premature birth and low birth weight.
Previous inguinal hernia or hernia repair. Even if your previous hernia occurred in childhood, you're at higher risk of developing another inguinal hernia.
Complications of an inguinal hernia include:
Pressure on surrounding tissues. Most inguinal hernias enlarge over time if not repaired surgically. In men, large hernias can extend into the scrotum, causing pain and swelling.
Incarcerated hernia. If the contents of the hernia become trapped in the weak point in the abdominal wall, it can obstruct the bowel, leading to severe pain, nausea, vomiting, and the inability to have a bowel movement or pass gas.
Strangulation. An incarcerated hernia can cut off blood flow to part of your intestine. Strangulation can lead to the death of the affected bowel tissue. A strangulated hernia is life-threatening and requires immediate surgery.
Insomnia symptoms may include: Difficulty falling asleep at night, Waking up during the night, Waking up too early, Not feeling well-rested after a night's sleep, Daytime tiredness or sleepiness, Irritability, depression or anxiety, Difficulty paying attention, focusing on tasks or remembering, Increased errors or accidents, Ongoing worries about sleep.
If insomnia makes it hard for you to function during the day, see your doctor to identify the cause of your sleep problem and how it can be treated. If your doctor thinks you could have a sleep disorder, you might be referred to a sleep center for special testing.
Insomnia may be the primary problem, or it may be associated with other conditions.
Chronic insomnia is usually a result of stress, life events or habits that disrupt sleep. Treating the underlying cause can resolve the insomnia, but sometimes it can last for years.
Common causes of chronic insomnia include:
Stress. Concerns about work, school, health, finances or family can keep your mind active at night, making it difficult to sleep. Stressful life events or trauma — such as the death or illness of a loved one, divorce, or a job loss — also may lead to insomnia.
Travel or work schedule. Your circadian rhythms act as an internal clock, guiding such things as your sleep-wake cycle, metabolism and body temperature. Disrupting your body's circadian rhythms can lead to insomnia. Causes include jet lag from traveling across multiple time zones, working a late or early shift, or frequently changing shifts.
Poor sleep habits. Poor sleep habits include an irregular bedtime schedule, naps, stimulating activities before bed, an uncomfortable sleep environment, and using your bed for work, eating or watching TV. Computers, TVs, video games, smartphones or other screens just before bed can interfere with your sleep cycle.
Eating too much late in the evening. Having a light snack before bedtime is OK, but eating too much may cause you to feel physically uncomfortable while lying down. Many people also experience heartburn, a backflow of acid and food from the stomach into the esophagus after eating, which may keep you awake.
Chronic insomnia may also be associated with medical conditions or the use of certain drugs. Treating the medical condition may help improve sleep, but the insomnia may persist after the medical condition improves.
Additional common causes of insomnia include:
Mental health disorders. Anxiety disorders, such as post-traumatic stress disorder, may disrupt your sleep. Awakening too early can be a sign of depression. Insomnia often occurs with other mental health disorders as well.
Medications. Many prescription drugs can interfere with sleep, such as certain antidepressants and medications for asthma or blood pressure. Many over-the-counter medications — such as some pain medications, allergy and cold medications, and weight-loss products — contain caffeine and other stimulants that can disrupt sleep.
Medical conditions. Examples of conditions linked with insomnia include chronic pain, cancer, diabetes, heart disease, asthma, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), overactive thyroid, Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease.
Sleep-related disorders. Sleep apnea causes you to stop breathing periodically throughout the night, interrupting your sleep. Restless legs syndrome causes unpleasant sensations in your legs and an almost irresistible desire to move them, which may prevent you from falling asleep.
Caffeine, nicotine and alcohol. Coffee, tea, cola and other caffeinated drinks are stimulants. Drinking them in the late afternoon or evening can keep you from falling asleep at night. Nicotine in tobacco products is another stimulant that can interfere with sleep. Alcohol may help you fall asleep, but it prevents deeper stages of sleep and often causes awakening in the middle of the night.
Insomnia becomes more common with age. As you get older, you may experience:
Changes in sleep patterns. Sleep often becomes less restful as you age, so noise or other changes in your environment are more likely to wake you. With age, your internal clock often advances, so you get tired earlier in the evening and wake up earlier in the morning. But older people generally still need the same amount of sleep as younger people do.
Changes in activity. You may be less physically or socially active. A lack of activity can interfere with a good night's sleep. Also, the less active you are, the more likely you may be to take a daily nap, which can interfere with sleep at night.
Changes in health. Chronic pain from conditions such as arthritis or back problems as well as depression or anxiety can interfere with sleep. Issues that increase the need to urinate during the night ―such as prostate or bladder problems ― can disrupt sleep. Sleep apnea and restless legs syndrome become more common with age.
More medications. Older people typically use more prescription drugs than younger people do, which increases the chance of insomnia associated with medications.
Sleep problems may be a concern for children and teenagers as well. However, some children and teens simply have trouble getting to sleep or resist a regular bedtime because their internal clocks are more delayed. They want to go to bed later and sleep later in the morning.
Nearly everyone has an occasional sleepless night. But your risk of insomnia is greater if:
You're a woman. Hormonal shifts during the menstrual cycle and in menopause may play a role. During menopause, night sweats and hot flashes often disrupt sleep. Insomnia is also common with pregnancy.
You're over age 60. Because of changes in sleep patterns and health, insomnia increases with age.
You have a mental health disorder or physical health condition. Many issues that impact your mental or physical health can disrupt sleep.
You're under a lot of stress. Stressful times and events can cause temporary insomnia. And major or long-lasting stress can lead to chronic insomnia.
You don't have a regular schedule. For example, changing shifts at work or traveling can disrupt your sleep-wake cycle.
Sleep is as important to your health as a healthy diet and regular physical activity. Whatever your reason for sleep loss, insomnia can affect you both mentally and physically. People with insomnia report a lower quality of life compared with people who are sleeping well.
Complications of insomnia may include: Lower performance on the job or at school, Slowed reaction time while driving and a higher risk of accidents, Mental health disorders, such as depression, an anxiety disorder or substance abuse, Increased risk and severity of long-term diseases or conditions, such as high blood pressure and heart disease.
Explosive eruptions occur suddenly, with little or no warning, and usually last less than 30 minutes. These episodes may occur frequently or be separated by weeks or months of nonaggression. Less severe verbal outbursts may occur in between episodes of physical aggression. You may be irritable, impulsive, aggressive or chronically angry most of the time.
Aggressive episodes may be preceded or accompanied by: Rage, Irritability, Increased energy, Racing thoughts, Tingling, Tremors, Palpitations, Chest tightness.
The explosive verbal and behavioral outbursts are out of proportion to the situation, with no thought to consequences, and can include: Temper tantrums, Tirades, Heated arguments, Shouting, Slapping, shoving or pushing, Physical fights, Property damage, Threatening or assaulting people or animals.
You may feel a sense of relief and tiredness after the episode. Later, you may feel remorse, regret or embarrassment.
If you recognize your own behavior in the description of intermittent explosive disorder, talk with your doctor about treatment options or ask for a referral to a mental health professional.
Intermittent explosive disorder can begin in childhood — after the age of 6 years — or during the teenage years. It's more common in younger adults than in older adults. The exact cause of the disorder is unknown, but it's probably caused by a number of environmental and biological factors.
Environment. Most people with this disorder grew up in families where explosive behavior and verbal and physical abuse were common. Being exposed to this type of violence at an early age makes it more likely these children will exhibit these same traits as they mature.
Genetics. There may be a genetic component, causing the disorder to be passed down from parents to children.
Differences in how the brain works. There may be differences in the structure, function and chemistry of the brain in people with intermittent explosive disorder compared to people who don't have the disorder.
These factors increase your risk of developing intermittent explosive disorder:
History of physical abuse. People who were abused as children or experienced multiple traumatic events have an increased risk of intermittent explosive disorder.
History of other mental health disorders. People who have antisocial personality disorder, borderline personality disorder or other disorders that include disruptive behaviors, such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), have an increased risk of also having intermittent explosive disorder.
People with intermittent explosive disorder have an increased risk of:
Impaired interpersonal relationships. They're often perceived by others as always being angry. They may have frequent verbal fights or there can be physical abuse. These actions can lead to relationship problems, divorce and family stress.
Trouble at work, home or school. Other complications of intermittent explosive disorder may include job loss, school suspension, car accidents, financial problems or trouble with the law.
Problems with mood. Mood disorders such as depression and anxiety often occur with intermittent explosive disorder.
Problems with alcohol and other substance use. Problems with drugs or alcohol often occur along with intermittent explosive disorder.
Physical health problems. Medical conditions are more common and can include, for example, high blood pressure, diabetes, heart disease and stroke, ulcers, and chronic pain.
Self-harm. Intentional injuries or suicide attempts sometimes occur.
The signs and symptoms of interstitial cystitis vary from person to person. If you have interstitial cystitis, your symptoms may also vary over time, periodically flaring in response to common triggers, such as menstruation, sitting for a long time, stress, exercise and sexual activity.
Interstitial cystitis signs and symptoms include: Pain in your pelvis or between the vagina and anus in women, Pain between the scrotum and anus in men (perineum), Chronic pelvic pain, A persistent, urgent need to urinate, Frequent urination, often of small amounts, throughout the day and night (up to 60 times a day), Pain or discomfort while the bladder fills and relief after urinating., Pain during sexual intercourse..
Symptoms severity is different for everyone, and some people may experience symptom-free periods.
Although signs and symptoms of interstitial cystitis may resemble those of a chronic urinary tract infection, there's usually no infection. However, symptoms may worsen if a person with interstitial cystitis gets a urinary tract infection.
If you're experiencing chronic bladder pain or urinary urgency and frequency, contact your doctor.
The exact cause of interstitial cystitis isn't known, but it's likely that many factors contribute. For instance, people with interstitial cystitis may also have a defect in the protective lining (epithelium) of the bladder. A leak in the epithelium may allow toxic substances in urine to irritate your bladder wall.
Other possible but unproven contributing factors include an autoimmune reaction, heredity, infection or allergy.
These factors are associated with a higher risk of interstitial cystitis:
Your sex. Women are diagnosed with interstitial cystitis more often than men. Symptoms in men may mimic interstitial cystitis, but they're more often associated with an inflammation of the prostate gland (prostatitis).
Your skin and hair color. Having fair skin and red hair has been associated with a greater risk of interstitial cystitis.
Your age. Most people with interstitial cystitis are diagnosed during their 30s or older.
Having a chronic pain disorder. Interstitial cystitis may be associated with other chronic pain disorder, such as irritable bowel syndrome or fibromyalgia.
Interstitial cystitis can result in a number of complications, including:
Reduced bladder capacity. Interstitial cystitis can cause stiffening of the bladder wall, which allows your bladder to hold less urine.
Lower quality of life. Frequent urination and pain may interfere with social activities, work and other activities of daily life.
Sexual intimacy problems. Frequent urination and pain may strain your personal relationships, and sexual intimacy may suffer.
Emotional troubles. The chronic pain and interrupted sleep associated with interstitial cystitis may cause emotional stress and can lead to depression.
The primary signs and symptoms of interstitial lung disease are: Shortness of breath at rest or aggravated by exertion, Dry cough.
By the time symptoms appear, irreversible lung damage has often already occurred. Nevertheless, it's important to see your doctor at the first sign of breathing problems. Many conditions other than interstitial lung disease can affect your lungs, and getting an early and accurate diagnosis is important for proper treatment.
Interstitial lung disease seems to occur when an injury to your lungs triggers an abnormal healing response. Ordinarily, your body generates just the right amount of tissue to repair damage. But in interstitial lung disease, the repair process goes awry and the tissue around the air sacs (alveoli) becomes scarred and thickened. This makes it more difficult for oxygen to pass into your bloodstream.
Interstitial lung disease can be triggered by many different things — including airborne toxins in the workplace, drugs and some types of medical treatments. In most cases, the causes are unknown.
Long-term exposure to a number of toxins and pollutants can damage your lungs. These may include: Silica dust, Asbestos fibers, Grain dust, Bird and animal droppings, Radiation treatments, Indoor hot tubs.
Some people who receive radiation therapy for lung or breast cancer show signs of lung damage months or sometimes years after the initial treatment.
Many drugs can damage your lungs, especially:
Chemotherapy drugs. Drugs designed to kill cancer cells, such as methotrexate (Otrexup, Trexall, others) and cyclophosphamide, can also damage lung tissue.
Heart medications. Some drugs used to treat irregular heartbeats, such as amiodarone (Nexterone, Pacerone) or propranolol (Inderal, Innopran), may harm lung tissue.
Some antibiotics. Nitrofurantoin (Macrobid, Macrodantin, others) and ethambutol (Myambutol) can cause lung damage.
Anti-inflammatory drugs. Certain anti-inflammatory drugs, such as rituximab (Rituxan) or sulfasalazine (Azulfidine), can cause lung damage.
Lung damage can also result from autoimmune diseases such as: Rheumatoid arthritis, Scleroderma, Dermatomyositis and polymyositis, Mixed connective tissue disease, Sjogren's syndrome, Sarcoidosis.
The list of substances and conditions that can lead to interstitial lung disease is long. Even so, in some cases, the causes are never found. Disorders without a known cause are grouped together under the label of idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, the most common and deadly of which is idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Factors that may make you more susceptible to interstitial lung disease include:
Age. Interstitial lung disease is much more likely to affect adults, although infants and children sometimes develop the disorder.
Exposure to occupational and environmental toxins. If you work in mining, farming or construction or for any reason are exposed to pollutants known to damage your lungs, your risk of interstitial lung disease is increased.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease. If you have uncontrolled acid reflux or indigestion, you may be at increased risk of interstitial lung disease.
Smoking. Some forms of interstitial lung disease are more likely to occur in people with a history of smoking, and active smoking may make the condition worse, especially if there is associated emphysema.
Radiation and chemotherapy. Having radiation treatments to your chest or using some chemotherapy drugs makes it more likely that you'll develop lung disease.
Interstitial lung disease can lead to a series of life-threatening complications, including:
High blood pressure in your lungs (pulmonary hypertension). Unlike systemic high blood pressure, this condition affects only the arteries in your lungs. It begins when scar tissue or low oxygen levels restrict the smallest blood vessels, limiting blood flow in your lungs. This in turn raises pressure within the pulmonary arteries. Pulmonary hypertension is a serious illness that becomes progressively worse.
Right-sided heart failure (cor pulmonale). This serious condition occurs when your heart's lower right chamber (right ventricle) — which is less muscular than the left — has to pump harder than usual to move blood through obstructed pulmonary arteries. Eventually the right ventricle fails from the extra strain. This is often a consequence of pulmonary hypertension.
Respiratory failure. In the end stage of chronic interstitial lung disease, respiratory failure occurs when severely low blood oxygen levels along with rising pressures in the pulmonary arteries and the right ventricle cause heart failure.
Signs and symptoms of intestinal ischemia can develop suddenly (acute) or gradually (chronic). Signs and symptoms may be different from one person to the next, but there are some generally recognized patterns that suggest intestinal ischemia.
Signs and symptoms of acute intestinal ischemia typically include: Sudden abdominal pain that may be mild, moderate or severe, An urgent need to have a bowel movement, Frequent, forceful bowel movements, Abdominal tenderness or distention, Blood in your stool, Mental confusion in older adults.
Signs and symptoms of chronic intestinal ischemia can include: Abdominal cramps or fullness, usually within 30 minutes after eating, and lasting one to three hours, Abdominal pain that gets progressively worse over weeks or months, Fear of eating because of subsequent pain, Unintended weight loss, Diarrhea, Nausea, Bloating.
Seek immediate medical care if you have sudden, severe abdominal pain. Pain that makes you so uncomfortable that you can't sit still or find a comfortable position is a medical emergency.
If you have other signs or symptoms that worry you, make an appointment with your doctor.
Intestinal ischemia occurs when the blood flow through the major arteries that supply blood to your intestines slows or stops. The condition has many potential causes, including a blockage in an artery caused by a blood clot, or a narrowing of an artery due to buildup of deposits, such as cholesterol. Blockages also can occur in veins, but they're less common.
Intestinal ischemia is often divided into categories:
This type of intestinal ischemia, which is the most common, occurs when blood flow to the colon is slowed. The cause of diminished blood flow to the colon isn't always clear, but a number of conditions can make you more vulnerable to colon ischemia: Dangerously low blood pressure (hypotension) associated with heart failure, major surgery, trauma or shock, A blood clot in an artery supplying the colon, Twisting of the bowel (volvulus) or trapping of intestinal contents within a hernia, Excessive bowel enlargement from bowel obstruction caused by scar tissue or a tumor, Other medical disorders that affect your blood, such as inflammation of your blood vessels (vasculitis), lupus or sickle cell anemia, Medications that constrict blood vessels, such as some used to treat heart disease and migraine, Hormonal medications, such as birth control pills, Cocaine or methamphetamine use, Vigorous exercise, such as long-distance running.
This type of intestinal ischemia usually affects the small intestine. It has an abrupt onset and may be due to:
A blood clot (embolus) that dislodges from your heart and travels through your bloodstream to block an artery, usually the superior mesenteric artery, which supplies oxygen-rich blood to your intestines. This is the most common cause of acute mesenteric artery ischemia and can be brought on by congestive heart failure, an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia) or a heart attack.
A blockage that develops within one of the main intestinal arteries and slows or stops blood flow, often as a result of fatty deposits (atherosclerosis) building up on the wall of an artery. This type of sudden ischemia tends to occur in people with chronic intestinal ischemia.
Impaired blood flow resulting from low blood pressure due to shock, heart failure, certain medications or chronic kidney failure. This is more common in people who have other serious illnesses and who have some degree of atherosclerosis. This type of acute mesenteric ischemia is often referred to as nonocclusive ischemia, which means that it's not due to a blockage in the artery.
Chronic mesenteric ischemia, also known as intestinal angina, results from the buildup of fatty deposits on an artery wall (atherosclerosis). The disease process is generally gradual, and you may not require treatment until at least two of the three major arteries supplying your intestines become severely narrowed or completely obstructed.
A potentially dangerous complication of chronic mesenteric ischemia is the development of a blood clot within a diseased artery, causing blood flow to be suddenly blocked (acute mesenteric ischemia).
A blood clot can develop in a vein draining deoxygenated blood from your intestines. When the vein is blocked, blood backs up in the intestines, causing swelling and bleeding. This is called mesenteric venous thrombosis, and it may result from: Acute or chronic inflammation of your pancreas (pancreatitis), Abdominal infection, Cancers of the digestive system, Bowel diseases, such as ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease or diverticulitis, Disorders that make your blood more prone to clotting (hypercoagulation disorders), such as an inherited clotting disorder, Medications such as estrogen that can increase clotting risk, Abdominal injuries.
Factors that may increase your risk of intestinal ischemia include:
Buildup of fatty deposits in your arteries (atherosclerosis). If you've had other conditions caused by atherosclerosis, such as decreased blood flow to your heart (coronary artery disease), legs (peripheral vascular disease) or the arteries serving your brain (carotid artery disease), you have an increased risk of intestinal ischemia.
Age. People older than 50 are more likely to develop intestinal ischemia.
Smoking. Cigarettes and other forms of smoked tobacco increase your risk of intestinal ischemia.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Emphysema and other smoking-related lung diseases increase your risk of intestinal ischemia.
Heart problems. Your risk of intestinal ischemia is increased if you have congestive heart failure or an irregular heartbeat such as atrial fibrillation.
Medications. Certain medications may increase your risk of intestinal ischemia. Examples include birth control pills and medications that cause your blood vessels to expand or contract, such as certain allergy medications and migraine medications.
Blood-clotting problems. Diseases and conditions that increase your risk of blood clots may increase your risk of intestinal ischemia. Examples include sickle cell anemia and the Factor V Leiden mutation.
Illegal drug use. Cocaine and methamphetamine use have been linked to intestinal ischemia.
Complications of intestinal ischemia can include:
Death of intestinal tissue. If blood flow to your intestine is completely and suddenly blocked, intestinal tissue can die (gangrene).
Perforation. A hole through the wall of the intestines can develop. This results in the contents of the intestine leaking into the abdominal cavity, causing a serious infection (peritonitis).
Scarring or narrowing of your colon. Sometimes the intestines can recover from ischemia, but as part of the healing process the body forms scar tissue that narrows or blocks the intestines.
In some cases, intestinal ischemia is fatal.
Signs and symptoms of intestinal obstruction include: Crampy abdominal pain that comes and goes, Loss of appetite, Constipation, Vomiting, Inability to have a bowel movement or pass gas, Swelling of the abdomen.
Because of the serious complications that can develop from intestinal obstruction, seek immediate medical care if you have severe abdominal pain or other symptoms of intestinal obstruction.
The most common causes of intestinal obstruction in adults are: Intestinal adhesions — bands of fibrous tissue in the abdominal cavity that can form after abdominal or pelvic surgery, Colon cancer.
In children, the most common cause of intestinal obstruction is telescoping of the intestine (intussusception).
Other possible causes of intestinal obstruction include: Hernias — portions of intestine that protrude into another part of your body, Inflammatory bowel diseases, such as Crohn's disease, Diverticulitis — a condition in which small, bulging pouches (diverticula) in the digestive tract become inflamed or infected, Twisting of the colon (volvulus), Impacted feces.
Intestinal pseudo-obstruction (paralytic ileus) can cause signs and symptoms of intestinal obstruction, but doesn't involve a physical blockage. In paralytic ileus, muscle or nerve problems disrupt the normal coordinated muscle contractions of the intestines, slowing or stopping the movement of food and fluid through the digestive system.
Paralytic ileus can affect any part of the intestine. Causes can include: Abdominal or pelvic surgery, Infection, Certain medications that affect muscles and nerves, including tricyclic antidepressants, such as amitriptyline  and imipramine (Tofranil), and opioid pain medications, such as those containing hydrocodone (Vicodin) and oxycodone (Oxycontin), Muscle and nerve disorders, such as Parkinson's disease.
Diseases and conditions that can increase your risk of intestinal obstruction include: Abdominal or pelvic surgery, which often causes adhesions — a common intestinal obstruction, Crohn's disease, which can cause the intestine's walls to thicken, narrowing the passageway, Cancer in your abdomen, especially if you've had surgery to remove an abdominal tumor or radiation therapy.
Untreated, intestinal obstruction can cause serious, life-threatening complications, including:
Tissue death. Intestinal obstruction can cut off the blood supply to part of your intestine. Lack of blood causes the intestinal wall to die. Tissue death can result in a tear (perforation) in the intestinal wall, which can lead to infection.
Infection. Peritonitis is the medical term for infection in the abdominal cavity. It's a life-threatening condition that requires immediate medical and often surgical attention.
You might develop signs and symptoms of an intracranial hematoma right after an injury to your head, or they may take weeks or longer to appear. You might seem fine after a head injury, a period called the lucid interval.
However, with time, pressure on your brain increases, producing some or all of the following signs and symptoms: Increasing headache, Vomiting, Drowsiness and progressive loss of consciousness, Dizziness, Confusion, Unequal pupil size, Slurred speech, Loss of movement (paralysis) on the opposite side of the body from the head injury.
As more blood fills your brain or the narrow space between your brain and skull, other signs and symptoms may become apparent, such as: Lethargy, Seizures, Unconsciousness.
An intracranial hematoma can be life-threatening, requiring emergency treatment.
Seek immediate medical attention after a blow to the head if you: Lose consciousness, Have a persistent headache, Experience vomiting, weakness, blurred vision, unsteadiness.
If signs and symptoms aren't immediately evident after a blow to the head, watch for physical, mental and emotional changes. For example, if someone seems fine after a blow to the head and can talk but later becomes unconscious, seek immediate medical care.
Also, even if you feel fine, ask someone to keep an eye on you. Memory loss after a blow to your head can make you forget about the blow. Someone you tell might be more likely to recognize the warning signs and get you medical attention.
A head injury is the most common cause of bleeding within the skull. A head injury may result from motor vehicle or bicycle accidents, falls, assaults, and sports injuries.
If you're an older adult, even mild head trauma can cause a hematoma. This is especially true if you're taking a blood-thinning medication or an anti-platelet drug, such as aspirin.
You can have a serious injury even if there's no open wound, bruise or other obvious damage.
There are three categories of hematoma — subdural hematoma, epidural hematoma and intracerebral (intraparenchymal) hematoma.
This occurs when blood vessels — usually veins — rupture between your brain and the outermost of three membrane layers that cover your brain (dura mater). The leaking blood forms a hematoma that presses on the brain tissue. An enlarging hematoma can cause gradual loss of consciousness and possibly death.
The three types of subdural hematomas are:
Acute. This most dangerous type is generally caused by a severe head injury, and signs and symptoms usually appear immediately.
Subacute. Signs and symptoms take time to develop, sometimes days or weeks after your injury.
Chronic. The result of less severe head injuries, this type of hematoma can cause slow bleeding, and symptoms can take weeks and even months to appear. You might not recall injuring your head. For example, bumping your head while getting into the car can cause bleeding, especially if you're on blood-thinning medication.
All three types require medical attention as soon as signs and symptoms appear so that permanent brain damage can be prevented.
The risk of subdural hematoma increases as you age. The risk is also greater for people who: Take aspirin or other blood-thinning medication daily, Misuse alcohol.
Also called an extradural hematoma, this type occurs when a blood vessel — usually an artery — ruptures between the outer surface of the dura mater and the skull. Blood then leaks between the dura mater and the skull to form a mass that presses on brain tissue. The most common cause of an epidural hematoma is trauma.
Some people with this type of injury remain conscious, but most become drowsy or go into a coma from the moment of trauma. An epidural hematoma that affects an artery in your brain can be deadly without prompt treatment.
This type of hematoma, also known as intraparenchymal hematoma, occurs when blood pools in the tissues of the brain. There are many causes, including trauma, rupture of a bulging blood vessel (aneurysm), poorly connected arteries and veins from birth, high blood pressure, and tumors. Diseases can cause spontaneous leakage of blood into the brain. A head trauma can result in multiple severe intracerebral hematomas.
The first sign of intussusception in an otherwise healthy infant may be sudden, loud crying caused by abdominal pain. Infants who have abdominal pain may pull their knees to their chests when they cry.
The pain of intussusception comes and goes, usually every 15 to 20 minutes at first. These painful episodes last longer and happen more often as time passes.
Other frequent signs and symptoms of intussusception include: Stool mixed with blood and mucus (sometimes referred to as "currant jelly" stool because of its appearance), Vomiting, A lump in the abdomen, Lethargy, Diarrhea, Fever.
Not everyone has all of the symptoms. Some infants have no obvious pain, and some children don't pass blood or have a lump in the abdomen. Some older children have pain but no other symptoms.
Because intussusception is rare in adults and symptoms of the disorder often overlap with the symptoms of other disorders, it's more challenging to identify. The most common symptom is abdominal pain that comes and goes. Nausea and vomiting may also occur. People sometimes have symptoms for weeks before seeking medical attention.
Intussusception requires emergency medical care. If you or your child develops the signs or symptoms listed above, seek medical help right away.
In infants, remember that signs of abdominal pain may include recurrent bouts of pulling the knees to the chest and crying.
Your intestine is shaped like a long tube. In intussusception, one part of your intestine — usually the small intestine — slides inside an adjacent part. This is sometimes called telescoping because it's similar to the way a collapsible telescope folds together.
In some cases, the telescoping is caused by an abnormal growth in the intestine, such as a polyp or a tumor (called a lead point). The normal wave-like contractions of the intestine grab this lead point and pull it and the lining of the intestine into the bowel ahead of it. In most cases, however, no cause can be identified for intussusception.
In the vast majority of cases of intussusception in children, the cause is unknown. Because intussusception seems to occur more often in the fall and winter and because many children with the problem also have flu-like symptoms, some suspect a virus may play a role in the condition. Sometimes, a lead point can be identified as the cause of the condition — most frequently the lead point is a Meckel's diverticulum (a pouch in the lining of the small intestine).
In adults, intussusception is usually the result of a medical condition or procedure, including: A polyp or tumor, Scar-like tissue in the intestine (adhesions), Weight-loss surgery (gastric bypass) or other surgery on the intestinal tract, Inflammation due to diseases such as Crohn's disease.
Risk factors for intussusception include:
Age. Children — especially young children — are much more likely to develop intussusception than adults are. It's the most common cause of bowel obstruction in children between the ages of 6 months and 3 years.
Sex. Intussusception more often affects boys.
Abnormal intestinal formation at birth. Intestinal malrotation is a condition in which the intestine doesn't develop or rotate correctly, and it increases the risk for intussusception.
A prior history of intussusception. Once you've had intussusception, you're at increased risk of developing it again.
A family history. Siblings of someone who's had an intussusception are at a much higher risk of the disorder.
Intussusception can cut off the blood supply to the affected portion of the intestine. If left untreated, lack of blood causes tissue of the intestinal wall to die. Tissue death can lead to a tear (perforation) in the intestinal wall, which can cause an infection of the lining of the abdominal cavity (peritonitis).
Peritonitis is a life-threatening condition that requires immediate medical attention. Signs and symptoms of peritonitis include: Abdominal pain, Abdominal swelling, Fever.
Peritonitis may cause your child to go into shock. Signs and symptoms of shock include: Cool, clammy skin that may be pale or gray, A weak and rapid pulse, Abnormal breathing that may be either slow and shallow or very rapid, Anxiety or agitation, Profound listlessness.
A child who is in shock may be conscious or unconscious. If you suspect your child is in shock, seek emergency medical care right away.
At its earliest stages, invasive lobular carcinoma may cause no signs and symptoms. As it grows larger, invasive lobular carcinoma may cause: An area of thickening in part of the breast, A new area of fullness or swelling in the breast, A change in the texture or appearance of the skin over the breast, such as dimpling or thickening, A newly inverted nipple.
Invasive lobular carcinoma is less likely than other forms of breast cancer to cause a firm or distinct breast lump.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you. Your doctor will perform an examination and determine whether you need a diagnostic breast X-ray (mammogram) or a breast ultrasound.
Ask your doctor when to begin screening tests for breast cancer to help detect cancer early and before you may have any signs or symptoms. Routine screening tests may include a physical exam and a mammogram.
Various organizations differ on their screening recommendations, but many suggest women with an average risk of breast cancer consider beginning mammograms in their 40s.
If you have a family history of breast cancer or other factors that increase your risk of breast cancer, your doctor may recommend beginning screening mammograms or other tests at an earlier age.
It's not clear what causes invasive lobular carcinoma.
Doctors know that invasive lobular carcinoma begins when cells in one or more milk-producing glands of the breast develop mutations in their DNA. The mutations lead to the inability to control cell growth, which results in the cells dividing and growing rapidly. Depending on the aggressiveness of the cancer type, the cancer cells can spread to other parts of the body.
Lobular carcinoma cells tend to invade breast tissue by spreading out in a distinct way rather than forming a firm nodule. The affected area may have a different feel from the surrounding breast tissue, more like a thickening and fullness, but it's unlikely to feel like a lump.
Factors that may increase your risk of invasive lobular carcinoma include:
Being female. Women are more likely to develop breast cancer, but men also can develop breast cancer.
Older age. Your risk of breast cancer increases as you age. Women with invasive lobular carcinoma tend to be a few years older than women diagnosed with other types of breast cancer.
Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS). If you've been diagnosed with LCIS — abnormal cells confined within breast lobules — your risk of developing invasive cancer in either breast is increased. LCIS isn't cancer, but is an indication of increased risk of breast cancer of any type.
Postmenopausal hormone use. Use of the female hormones estrogen and progesterone during and after menopause has been shown to increase the risk of invasive lobular carcinoma.
Inherited genetic cancer syndromes. Women with a rare inherited condition called hereditary diffuse gastric cancer syndrome have an increased risk of both stomach (gastric) cancer and invasive lobular carcinoma.
Women with certain inherited genes may have an increased risk of breast and ovarian cancers.
Iritis can occur in one or both eyes. It usually develops suddenly, and can last up to three months.
Signs and symptoms of iritis include: Eye redness, Discomfort or achiness in the affected eye, Sensitivity to light, Decreased vision.
Iritis that develops suddenly, over hours or days, is known as acute iritis. Symptoms that develop gradually or last longer than three months indicate chronic iritis.
See an eye specialist (ophthalmologist) as soon as possible if you have symptoms of iritis. Prompt treatment helps prevent serious complications. If you have eye pain and vision problems with other signs and symptoms, you might need urgent medical care.
Often, the cause of iritis can't be determined. In some cases, iritis can be linked to eye trauma, genetic factors or certain diseases. Causes of iritis include:
Injury to the eye. Blunt force trauma, a penetrating injury, or a burn from a chemical or fire can cause acute iritis.
Infections. Viral infections on your face, such as cold sores and shingles caused by herpes viruses, can cause iritis.
Infectious diseases from other viruses and bacteria can also be linked to uveitis. For instance, they may include toxoplasmosis, an infection most often caused by a parasite in uncooked food; histoplasmosis, a lung infection that occurs when you inhale spores of fungus; tuberculosis, which happens when bacteria enters the lungs; and syphilis, which is caused by the spread of bacteria through sexual contact.
Genetic predisposition. People who develop certain autoimmune diseases because of a gene alteration that affects their immune systems might also develop acute iritis. Diseases include a type of arthritis called ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease and psoriatic arthritis.
Behcet's disease. An uncommon cause of acute iritis in Western countries, this condition is also characterized by joint problems, mouth sores and genital sores.
Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Chronic iritis can develop in children with this condition.
Sarcoidosis. This autoimmune disease involves the growth of collections of inflammatory cells in areas of your body, including your eyes.
Certain medications. Some drugs, such as the antibiotic rifabutin (Mycobutin) and the antiviral medication cidofovir, that are used to treat HIV infections can be a rare cause of iritis. Rarely, bisphosphonates, used to treat osteoporosis, can cause uveitis. Stopping these medications usually stops the iritis symptoms.
Your risk of developing iritis increases if you:
Have a specific genetic alteration. People with a specific change in a gene that's essential for healthy immune system function are more likely to develop iritis. This change is labeled HLA-B27.
Develop a sexually transmitted infection. Certain infections, such as syphilis or HIV/AIDS, are linked with a significant risk of iritis.
Have a weakened immune system or an autoimmune disorder. This includes conditions such as ankylosing spondylitis and reactive arthritis.
Smoke tobacco. Studies have shown that smoking contributes to your risk.
If not treated properly, iritis could lead to:
Cataracts. Development of a clouding of the lens of your eye (cataract) is a possible complication, especially if you've had a long period of inflammation.
An irregular pupil. Scar tissue can cause the iris to stick to the underlying lens or the cornea, making the pupil irregular in shape and the iris sluggish in its reaction to light.
Glaucoma. Recurrent iritis can result in glaucoma, a serious eye condition characterized by increased pressure inside the eye and possible vision loss.
Calcium deposits on the cornea. This causes degeneration of your cornea and could decrease your vision.
Swelling within the retina. Swelling and fluid-filled cysts that develop in the retina at the back of the eye can blur or decrease your central vision.
Initially, iron deficiency anemia can be so mild that it goes unnoticed. But as the body becomes more deficient in iron and anemia worsens, the signs and symptoms intensify.
Iron deficiency anemia signs and symptoms may include: Extreme fatigue, Weakness, Pale skin, Chest pain, fast heartbeat or shortness of breath, Headache, dizziness or lightheadedness, Cold hands and feet, Inflammation or soreness of your tongue, Brittle nails, Unusual cravings for non-nutritive substances, such as ice, dirt or starch, Poor appetite, especially in infants and children with iron deficiency anemia.
If you or your child develops signs and symptoms that suggest iron deficiency anemia, see your doctor. Iron deficiency anemia isn't something to self-diagnose or treat. So see your doctor for a diagnosis rather than taking iron supplements on your own. Overloading the body with iron can be dangerous because excess iron accumulation can damage your liver and cause other complications.
Iron deficiency anemia occurs when your body doesn't have enough iron to produce hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is the part of red blood cells that gives blood its red color and enables the red blood cells to carry oxygenated blood throughout your body.
If you aren't consuming enough iron, or if you're losing too much iron, your body can't produce enough hemoglobin, and iron deficiency anemia will eventually develop.
Causes of iron deficiency anemia include:
Blood loss. Blood contains iron within red blood cells. So if you lose blood, you lose some iron. Women with heavy periods are at risk of iron deficiency anemia because they lose blood during menstruation. Slow, chronic blood loss within the body — such as from a peptic ulcer, a hiatal hernia, a colon polyp or colorectal cancer — can cause iron deficiency anemia. Gastrointestinal bleeding can result from regular use of some over-the-counter pain relievers, especially aspirin.
A lack of iron in your diet. Your body regularly gets iron from the foods you eat. If you consume too little iron, over time your body can become iron deficient. Examples of iron-rich foods include meat, eggs, leafy green vegetables and iron-fortified foods. For proper growth and development, infants and children need iron from their diets, too.
An inability to absorb iron. Iron from food is absorbed into your bloodstream in your small intestine. An intestinal disorder, such as celiac disease, which affects your intestine's ability to absorb nutrients from digested food, can lead to iron deficiency anemia. If part of your small intestine has been bypassed or removed surgically, that may affect your ability to absorb iron and other nutrients.
Pregnancy. Without iron supplementation, iron deficiency anemia occurs in many pregnant women because their iron stores need to serve their own increased blood volume as well as be a source of hemoglobin for the growing fetus.
These groups of people may have an increased risk of iron deficiency anemia:
Women. Because women lose blood during menstruation, women in general are at greater risk of iron deficiency anemia.
Infants and children. Infants, especially those who were low birth weight or born prematurely, who don't get enough iron from breast milk or formula may be at risk of iron deficiency. Children need extra iron during growth spurts. If your child isn't eating a healthy, varied diet, he or she may be at risk of anemia.
Vegetarians. People who don't eat meat may have a greater risk of iron deficiency anemia if they don't eat other iron-rich foods.
Frequent blood donors. People who routinely donate blood may have an increased risk of iron deficiency anemia since blood donation can deplete iron stores. Low hemoglobin related to blood donation may be a temporary problem remedied by eating more iron-rich foods. If you're told that you can't donate blood because of low hemoglobin, ask your doctor whether you should be concerned.
Mild iron deficiency anemia usually doesn't cause complications. However, left untreated, iron deficiency anemia can become severe and lead to health problems, including the following:
Heart problems. Iron deficiency anemia may lead to a rapid or irregular heartbeat. Your heart must pump more blood to compensate for the lack of oxygen carried in your blood when you're anemic. This can lead to an enlarged heart or heart failure.
Problems during pregnancy. In pregnant women, severe iron deficiency anemia has been linked to premature births and low birth weight babies. But the condition is preventable in pregnant women who receive iron supplements as part of their prenatal care.
Growth problems. In infants and children, severe iron deficiency can lead to anemia as well as delayed growth and development. Additionally, iron deficiency anemia is associated with an increased susceptibility to infections.
The signs and symptoms of IBS vary but are usually present for a long time. The most common include: Abdominal pain, cramping or bloating that is related to passing a bowel movement, Changes in appearance of bowel movement, Changes in how often you are having a bowel movement.
Other symptoms that are often related include bloating, increased gas or mucus in the stool.
See your doctor if you have a persistent change in bowel habits or other signs or symptoms of IBS. They may indicate a more serious condition, such as colon cancer. More-serious signs and symptoms include: Weight loss, Diarrhea at night, Rectal bleeding, Iron deficiency anemia, Unexplained vomiting, Difficulty swallowing, Persistent pain that isn't relieved by passing gas or a bowel movement.
The precise cause of IBS isn't known. Factors that appear to play a role include:
Muscle contractions in the intestine. The walls of the intestines are lined with layers of muscle that contract as they move food through your digestive tract. Contractions that are stronger and last longer than normal can cause gas, bloating and diarrhea. Weak intestinal contractions can slow food passage and lead to hard, dry stools.
Nervous system. Abnormalities in the nerves in your digestive system may cause you to experience greater than normal discomfort when your abdomen stretches from gas or stool. Poorly coordinated signals between the brain and the intestines can cause your body to overreact to changes that normally occur in the digestive process, resulting in pain, diarrhea or constipation.
Severe infection. IBS can develop after a severe bout of diarrhea (gastroenteritis) caused by bacteria or a virus. IBS might also be associated with a surplus of bacteria in the intestines (bacterial overgrowth).
Early life stress. People exposed to stressful events, especially in childhood, tend to have more symptoms of IBS.
Changes in gut microbes. Examples include changes in bacteria, fungi and viruses, which normally reside in the intestines and play a key role in health. Research indicates that the microbes in people with IBS might differ from those in healthy people.
Symptoms of IBS can be triggered by:
Food. The role of food allergy or intolerance in IBS isn't fully understood. A true food allergy rarely causes IBS. But many people have worse IBS symptoms when they eat or drink certain foods or beverages, including wheat, dairy products, citrus fruits, beans, cabbage, milk and carbonated drinks.
Stress. Most people with IBS experience worse or more-frequent signs and symptoms during periods of increased stress. But while stress may aggravate symptoms, it doesn't cause them.
Many people have occasional signs and symptoms of IBS. But you're more likely to have the syndrome if you:
Are young. IBS occurs more frequently in people under age 50.
Are female. In the United States, IBS is more common among women. Estrogen therapy before or after menopause also is a risk factor for IBS.
Have a family history of IBS. Genes may play a role, as may shared factors in a family's environment or a combination of genes and environment.
Have anxiety, depression or other mental health issues. A history of sexual, physical or emotional abuse also might be a risk factor.
Chronic constipation or diarrhea can cause hemorrhoids.
In addition, IBS is associated with:
Poor quality of life. Many people with moderate to severe IBS report poor quality of life. Research indicates that people with IBS miss three times as many days from work as do those without bowel symptoms.
Mood disorders. Experiencing the signs and symptoms of IBS can lead to depression or anxiety. Depression and anxiety also can make IBS worse.
Signs and symptoms of ischemic colitis can include: Pain, tenderness or cramping in your belly, which can occur suddenly or gradually, Bright red or maroon blood in your stool or, at times, passage of blood alone without stool, A feeling of urgency to move your bowels, Diarrhea, Nausea.
The risk of severe complications is higher when you have symptoms on the right side of your abdomen. That's because the arteries that feed the right side of your colon also feed part of your small intestine, so that area may also receive too little blood. Pain tends to be severe with this type of ischemic colitis.
Blocked blood flow to the small intestine can quickly lead to the death of intestinal tissue (necrosis). If this life-threatening situation occurs, you'll need surgery to clear the blockage and to remove the portion of the intestine that has been damaged.
Seek immediate medical care if you have sudden, severe abdominal pain. Abdominal pain that makes you so uncomfortable that you can't sit still or find a comfortable position is a medical emergency.
Contact your doctor if you develop worrisome signs and symptoms, such as bloody diarrhea. Early diagnosis and treatment can help prevent serious complications.
The precise cause of diminished blood flow to the colon isn't always clear. But several factors can increase your risk of ischemic colitis: Buildup of fatty deposits on the walls of an artery (atherosclerosis), Dangerously low blood pressure (hypotension) associated with heart failure, major surgery, trauma or shock, A blood clot in an artery supplying the colon or, less commonly, in a vein (venous thrombosis), Bowel obstruction caused by a hernia, scar tissue or a tumor, Surgery involving the heart or blood vessels, or the digestive or gynecological systems, Other medical disorders that affect your blood, such as inflammation of the blood vessels (vasculitis), lupus or sickle cell anemia, Cocaine or methamphetamine use, Colon cancer (rare).
The use of certain medicines also can lead to ischemic colitis, though this is rare. These medications include: Some heart and migraine medications, Hormone medications, such as estrogen, Antibiotics, Pseudoephedrine, Certain medications for irritable bowel syndrome, Chemotherapy medications.
Risk factors for ischemic colitis include:
Age. The condition occurs mostly frequently in adults older than age 60. Ischemic colitis that occurs in a young adult may be a sign of a blood-clotting abnormality or inflammation of the blood vessels (vasculitis).
Clotting abnormalities. Conditions that affect the way the blood clots, such as factor V Leiden, may increase the risk of ischemic colitis.
High cholesterol, which can lead to atherosclerosis.
Reduced blood flow, due to heart failure, low blood pressure and shock.
Previous abdominal surgery. Scar tissue that forms after surgery may cause reduced blood flow.
Heavy exercise, such as marathon running, which can lead to reduced blood flow to the colon.
Surgery involving the large artery (aorta) that pumps blood from your heart to the rest of your body.
Ischemic colitis usually gets better on its own within two to three days. In more-severe cases, complications can include: Tissue death (gangrene) resulting from diminished blood flow, Hole formation (perforation) in your intestine or persistent bleeding, Bowel inflammation (segmented ulcerating colitis), Bowel obstruction (ischemic stricture).
You may have itchy skin over certain small areas, such as on an arm or leg, or over your whole body. Itchy skin can occur without any other noticeable changes on the skin. Or it may be associated with: Redness, Bumps, spots or blisters, Dry, cracked skin, Leathery or scaly skin.
Sometimes itchiness lasts a long time and can be intense. As you rub or scratch the area, it gets itchier. And the more it itches, the more you scratch. Breaking this itch-scratch cycle can be difficult.
See your doctor or a skin disease specialist (dermatologist) if the itching: Lasts more than two weeks and doesn't improve with self-care measures, Is severe and distracts you from your daily routines or prevents you from sleeping, Comes on suddenly and can't be easily explained, Affects your whole body, Is accompanied by other signs and symptoms, such as extreme tiredness, weight loss, changes in bowel habits, or urinary frequency, fever or redness of the skin.
If the condition persists for three months despite treatment, see a dermatologist to be evaluated for skin disease and an internist to be evaluated for other diseases.
Causes of itchy skin include:
Skin conditions. Many skin conditions itch, including dry skin (xerosis), eczema (dermatitis), psoriasis, scabies, burns, scars, insect bites and hives.
Internal diseases. Itchy skin can be a symptom of an underlying illness. These include liver disease, kidney failure, iron deficiency anemia, thyroid problems and certain cancers, including multiple myeloma and lymphoma.
Nerve disorders. Conditions that affect the nervous system — such as multiple sclerosis, diabetes, pinched nerves and shingles (herpes zoster) — can cause itching.
Psychiatric diseases. Examples of psychiatric diseases that can cause itchy skin are anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder and depression.
Irritation and allergic reactions. Wool, chemicals, soaps and other substances can irritate the skin and cause itching. Sometimes the substance, such as poison ivy, parasites or cosmetics, causes an allergic reaction. Also, reactions to certain drugs, such as narcotic pain medications (opioids) can cause itchy skin.
Pregnancy. During pregnancy, some women experience itchy skin.
Sometimes the cause of the itching can't be determined.
Itchy skin that lasts more than six weeks (chronic pruritus) can affect the quality of your life, for example, by interrupting your sleep and causing anxiety or depression. Prolonged itching and scratching may increase the intensity of the itch, possibly leading to skin injury, infection and scarring.
A tumor is an abnormal growth or mass of tissue. A cyst is a lesion that contains liquid or semisolid material. Examples of jaw tumors and cysts include:
Ameloblastoma. This is a relatively common, slow-growing, usually noncancerous (benign) tumor. It develops most often in the jaw near the molars and can invade local structures such as bone and soft tissue. This tumor can recur after treatment; however, aggressive surgical treatments will typically reduce the chance of recurrence.
Central giant cell granuloma. Central giant cell granulomas are benign lesions that most often occur in the front portion of the lower jaw. Some of these tumors can grow rapidly, can cause pain and destroy bone, and have a tendency to recur after surgical treatment. The other types are less aggressive and may not have symptoms. Rarely, a tumor may shrink or resolve on its own, but typically these tumors require surgical treatment.
Dentigerous cyst. This cyst originates from tissue that surrounds a tooth before it erupts into the mouth. This is the most common form of cyst that affects the jaws. Most often these cysts will occur around wisdom teeth that are not fully erupted, but they can also involve other teeth.
Odontogenic keratocyst. Also referred to as keratocystic odontogenic tumor because of its tumorlike tendency to recur after surgical treatment, this slow-growing, benign cyst can be destructive to local structures. Most often the cyst develops in the lower jaw near the third molars. These cysts may also be found in people with an inherited condition called nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome.
Odontogenic myxoma. This is a rare, slow-growing, benign tumor that occurs most often in the lower jaw. The tumor can be large and aggressively invade the jaw and surrounding tissue and displace teeth. Odontogenic myxomas are known to recur after surgical treatment; however, the chances of tumor recurrence are typically lessened by aggressive surgical treatment.
Odontoma. This benign tumor is the most common odontogenic tumor. Odontomas often have no symptoms, but may interfere with tooth development or eruption. Odontomas are made up of dental tissue that grows around a tooth in the jaw. They can resemble an oddly shaped tooth or can be a small or large calcified tumor. These tumors may be part of some genetic syndromes.
Other types of cysts and tumors. These include adenomatoid odontogenic tumors, calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumors, ameloblastic fibromas, glandular odontogenic cysts, squamous odontogenic tumors, calcifying odontogenic cysts, cementoblastomas, aneurysmal bone cysts, ossifying fibromas, osteoblastomas and central odontogenic fibromas to name a few.
If you're concerned that you may have symptoms of a jaw tumor or cyst, talk with your primary care doctor or dentist. If necessary, he or she can refer you to the proper specialist for diagnosis and treatment.
Common signs and symptoms of jellyfish stings include: Burning, prickling, stinging pain, Red, brown or purplish tracks on the skin — a "print" of the tentacles' contact with your skin, Itching, Swelling, Throbbing pain that radiates up a leg or an arm.
Severe jellyfish stings can affect multiple body systems. These reactions may appear rapidly or several hours after the stings. Signs and symptoms of severe jellyfish stings include: Stomach pain, nausea and vomiting, Headache, Muscle pain or spasms, Weakness, drowsiness, fainting and confusion, Difficulty breathing, Heart problems.
The severity of your reaction depends on: The type and size of the jellyfish, Your age, size and health, with severe reactions more likely in children and people in poor health, How long you were exposed to the stingers, How much of your skin is affected.
Seek emergency treatment if you have severe symptoms.
Jellyfish tentacles contain microscopic barbed stingers. Each stinger has a tiny bulb that holds venom and a coiled, sharp-tipped tube. The jellyfish uses the venom to protect itself and kill prey.
When you brush against a tentacle, tiny triggers on its surface release the stingers. The tube penetrates the skin and releases venom. It affects the immediate area of contact and may enter the bloodstream.
Jellyfish that have washed up on a beach may still release venomous stingers if touched.
While many types of jellyfish are relatively harmless to humans, some can cause severe pain and are more likely to cause a systemic reaction. These jellyfish cause more-serious problems in people:
Box jellyfish. Box jellyfish can cause intense pain. Life-threatening reactions — although rare — are more common with this type. The more dangerous species of box jellyfish are in the warm waters of the Pacific and Indian oceans.
Portuguese man-of-war. Also called bluebottle jellyfish, Portuguese man-of-war jellyfish live mostly in warmer seas. This type has a blue or purplish gas-filled bubble that keeps it afloat on the water and acts as a sail.
Sea nettle. Common in both warm and cool seawaters, sea nettles live along the northeast coast of the United States and are abundant in the Chesapeake Bay.
Lion's mane jellyfish. These are the world's largest jellyfish, with a body diameter of more than 3 feet (1 meter). They're most common in cooler, northern regions of the Pacific and Atlantic oceans.
Conditions that increase your risk of getting stung by jellyfish include: Swimming at times when jellyfish appear in large numbers (a jellyfish bloom), Swimming or diving in jellyfish areas without protective clothing, Playing or sunbathing where jellyfish are washed up on the beach, Swimming in a place known to have many jellyfish.
Possible complications of a jellyfish sting include: Delayed hypersensitivity reaction, causing blisters, rash or other skin irritations one to two weeks after the sting, Irukandji syndrome, which causes chest and stomach pain, high blood pressure and heart problems.
Symptoms of jet lag can vary. You may experience only one symptom or you may have many. Jet lag symptoms may include: Disturbed sleep — such as insomnia, early waking or excessive sleepiness, Daytime fatigue, Difficulty concentrating or functioning at your usual level, Stomach problems, constipation or diarrhea, A general feeling of not being well, Mood changes.
Jet lag symptoms usually occur within a day or two of travel if you've traveled across at least two time zones. Symptoms are likely to be worse or last longer the more time zones that you've crossed, especially if you travel in an easterly direction. It usually takes about a day to recover for each time zone crossed.
Jet lag is temporary. But if you're a frequent traveler and continually struggle with jet lag, you may benefit from seeing a sleep specialist.
Jet lag can occur anytime you cross two or more time zones. Jet lag occurs because crossing multiple time zones puts your internal clock (circadian rhythms), which regulates your sleep-wake cycle, out of sync with the time in your new locale.
For example, if you leave New York on a flight at 4 p.m. on Tuesday and arrive in Paris at 7 a.m. Wednesday, your internal clock still thinks it's 1 a.m. That means you're ready for bed just as Parisians are waking up.
And because it takes a few days for your body to adjust, your sleep-wake cycle, along with most other body functions, such as hunger and bowel habits, remains out of step with the rest of Paris.
A key influence on your internal clock is sunlight. That's because light influences the regulation of melatonin, a hormone that helps synchronize cells throughout the body.
Certain cells in the tissue at the back of your eye (retina) transmit the light signals to an area of your brain called the hypothalamus.
At night, when the light signal is low, the hypothalamus tells the pineal gland, a small organ situated in the brain, to release melatonin. During daylight hours, the opposite occurs, and the pineal gland releases very little melatonin.
You may be able to ease your adjustment to your new time zone by exposing yourself to daylight in the new time zone so long as the timing of light is done properly.
Some research shows that changes in cabin pressure and high altitudes associated with air travel may contribute to some symptoms of jet lag, regardless of travel across time zones.
In addition, humidity levels are low in planes. If you don't drink enough water during your flight, you can get slightly dehydrated. Dehydration may also contribute to some symptoms of jet lag.
Factors that increase the likelihood you'll experience jet lag include:
Number of time zones crossed. The more time zones you cross, the more likely you are to be jet-lagged.
Flying east. You may find it harder to fly east, when you "lose" time, than to fly west, when you gain time.
Being a frequent flyer. Pilots, flight attendants and business travelers are most likely to experience jet lag.
Being an older adult. Older adults may need more time to recover from jet lag than do younger adults.
Motor vehicle accidents caused by drowsy driving may be more likely in people who are jet-lagged.
Jock itch usually begins with a reddened area of skin in the crease in the groin. It often spreads to the upper thigh in a half-moon shape. The rash may be ring-shaped and bordered with a line of small blisters. It may burn or feel itchy, and the skin may be flaky or scaly.
See your doctor if your rash is painful or you develop a fever. And see your doctor if the rash hasn't improved after a week of treatment or if it hasn't cleared up completely after three weeks of treatment.
The organisms that cause jock itch thrive in damp, close environments. Jock itch is caused by a fungus that spreads from person to person or from sharing contaminated towels or clothing. It's often caused by the same fungus that causes athlete's foot. The infection often spreads from the feet to the groin because the fungus can travel on your hands or on a towel.
You're at greater risk of jock itch if you: Are male, Are a teen or young adult, Wear tight underwear, Are overweight, Sweat heavily, Have a weakened immune system, Have diabetes.
In some children, symptoms begin after a triggering event, such as physical trauma, surgery, infection or prolonged psychological stress. In other children, symptoms gradually accumulate over time with no single triggering event.
In children with fibromyalgia, signs and symptoms include:
Widespread pain. The pain associated with fibromyalgia often is described as a dull ache that has lasted for at least three months. To be considered widespread, the pain must occur on both sides of your body and above and below your waist.
Headache. Frequent headaches occur in a majority of children who have fibromyalgia.
Sleep disturbances. Despite complaints of severe fatigue, these children often take an hour or more to fall asleep. Even when they do fall asleep, many have difficulty maintaining sleep and wake up during the night.
Fatigue. People with fibromyalgia often awaken tired, even though they report sleeping for long periods of time. Many children with fibromyalgia have other sleep disorders, such as restless legs syndrome.
Other problems. Children who have fibromyalgia may also have pain or cramping in the lower abdomen with constipation or diarrhea. They may also have trouble paying attention or concentrating. Depression and anxiety are common in people who have fibromyalgia.
Doctors don't know why some people develop fibromyalgia and others don't. There appears to be a genetic component because the condition tends to run in families. In some people, it may be triggered by specific events, injuries or illnesses.
Researchers believe repeated nerve stimulation causes changes in the brain and spinal cord of people with fibromyalgia. These changes include an abnormal increase in levels of certain chemicals in the brain that signal pain. In addition, the brain's pain receptors seem to develop a sort of memory of the pain and become sensitized, meaning they can overreact to painful and nonpainful signals.
Risk factors for fibromyalgia include:
Your sex. Fibromyalgia is diagnosed more often in girls and women.
Family history. You may be more likely to develop fibromyalgia if a parent or sibling also has the condition.
Rheumatic disease. If you have a rheumatic disease, such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus, you may be more likely to develop fibromyalgia.
The pain and lack of sleep associated with fibromyalgia can interfere with the ability to function at school or at home. The frustration of dealing with an often misunderstood condition can result in depression and anxiety.
The most common signs and symptoms of juvenile idiopathic arthritis are:
Pain. While your child might not complain of joint pain, you may notice that he or she limps — especially first thing in the morning or after a nap.
Swelling. Joint swelling is common but is often first noticed in larger joints such as the knee.
Stiffness. You might notice that your child appears clumsier than usual, particularly in the morning or after naps.
Fever, swollen lymph nodes and rash. In some cases, high fever, swollen lymph nodes or a rash on the trunk may occur — which is usually worse in the evenings.
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis can affect one joint or many. There are several different subtypes of juvenile idiopathic arthritis, but the main ones are systemic, oligoarticular and polyarticular. Which type your child has depends on symptoms, the number of joints affected, and if a fever and rashes are prominent features.
Like other forms of arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis is characterized by times when symptoms flare up and times when symptoms disappear.
Take your child to the doctor if he or she has joint pain, swelling or stiffness for more than a week — especially if he or she also has a fever.
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis occurs when the body's immune system attacks its own cells and tissues. It's not known why this happens, but both heredity and environment seem to play a role. Certain gene mutations may make a person more susceptible to environmental factors — such as viruses — that may trigger the disease.
Some forms of juvenile idiopathic arthritis are more common in girls.
Several serious complications can result from juvenile idiopathic arthritis. But keeping a careful watch on your child's condition and seeking appropriate medical attention can greatly reduce the risk of these complications:
Eye problems. Some forms can cause eye inflammation (uveitis). If this condition is left untreated, it may result in cataracts, glaucoma and even blindness.
Eye inflammation frequently occurs without symptoms, so it's important for children with this condition to be examined regularly by an ophthalmologist.
Growth problems. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis can interfere with your child's growth and bone development. Some medications used for treatment, mainly corticosteroids, also can inhibit growth.
Kawasaki disease signs and symptoms usually appear in three phases.
Signs and symptoms of the first phase may include: A fever that is often is higher than 102.2 F (39 C) and lasts more than three days, Extremely red eyes without a thick discharge, A rash on the main part of the body and in the genital area, Red, dry, cracked lips and an extremely red, swollen tongue, Swollen, red skin on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet, Swollen lymph nodes in the neck and perhaps elsewhere, Irritability.
In the second phase of the disease, your child may develop: Peeling of the skin on the hands and feet, especially the tips of the fingers and toes, often in large sheets, Joint pain, Diarrhea, Vomiting, Abdominal pain.
In the third phase of the disease, signs and symptoms slowly go away unless complications develop. It may be as long as eight weeks before energy levels seem normal again.
If your child has a fever that lasts more than three days, contact your child's doctor. Also, see your child's doctor if your child has a fever along with four or more of the following signs and symptoms: Redness in both eyes, A very red, swollen tongue, Redness of the palms or soles, Skin peeling, A rash, Swollen lymph nodes.
Treating Kawasaki disease within 10 days of when it began may greatly reduce the chances of lasting damage.
No one knows what causes Kawasaki disease, but scientists don't believe the disease is contagious from person to person. A number of theories link the disease to bacteria, viruses or other environmental factors, but none has been proved. Certain genes may make your child more likely to get Kawasaki disease.
Three things are known to increase your child's risk of developing Kawasaki disease.
Age. Children under 5 years old are most at risk of Kawasaki disease.
Sex. Boys are slightly more likely than girls are to develop Kawasaki disease.
Ethnicity. Children of Asian or Pacific Island descent, such as Japanese or Korean, have higher rates of Kawasaki disease.
Kawasaki disease is a leading cause of acquired heart disease in children. However, with effective treatment, only a few children have lasting damage.
Heart complications include: Inflammation of blood vessels, usually the coronary arteries, that supply blood to the heart, Inflammation of the heart muscle, Heart valve problems.
Any of these complications can damage your child's heart. Inflammation of the coronary arteries can lead to weakening and bulging of the artery wall (aneurysm). Aneurysms increase the risk of blood clots, which could lead to a heart attack or cause life-threatening internal bleeding.
For a very small percentage of children who develop coronary artery problems, Kawasaki disease can cause death, even with treatment.
Signs and symptoms of keratitis include: Eye redness, Eye pain, Excess tears or other discharge from your eye, Difficulty opening your eyelid because of pain or irritation, Blurred vision, Decreased vision, Sensitivity to light (photophobia), A feeling that something is in your eye.
If you notice any of the signs or symptoms of keratitis, make an appointment to see your doctor right away. Delays in diagnosis and treatment of keratitis can lead to serious complications, including blindness.
Causes of keratitis include:
Injury. If any object scratches or injures the surface of your cornea, noninfectious keratitis may result. In addition, an injury may allow microorganisms to gain access to the damaged cornea, causing infectious keratitis.
Contaminated contact lenses. Bacteria, fungi or parasites — particularly the microscopic parasite acanthamoeba — may inhabit the surface of a contact lens or contact lens carrying case. The cornea may become contaminated when the lens is in your eye, resulting in infectious keratitis. Over-wearing your contact lenses can cause keratitis, which can become infectious.
Viruses. The herpes viruses (herpes simplex and herpes zoster) may cause keratitis.
Bacteria. The bacterium that causes gonorrhea can cause keratitis.
Contaminated water. Bacteria, fungi and parasites in water — particularly in oceans, rivers, lakes and hot tubs — can enter your eyes when you're swimming and result in keratitis. However, even if you're exposed to these bacteria, fungi or parasites, a healthy cornea is unlikely to become infected unless there has been some previous breakdown of the corneal surface — for example, wearing a contact lens too long.
Factors that may increase your risk of keratitis include:
Contact lenses. Wearing contact lenses — especially sleeping in the lenses —increases your risk of both infectious and noninfectious keratitis. The risk typically stems from wearing them longer than recommended, improper disinfection or wearing contact lenses while swimming.
Keratitis is more common in people who use extended-wear contacts, or wear contacts continuously, than in those who use daily wear contacts and take them out at night.
Reduced immunity. If your immune system is compromised due to disease or medications, you're at higher risk of developing keratitis.
Corticosteroids. Use of corticosteroid eyedrops to treat an eye disorder can increase your risk of developing infectious keratitis or worsen existing keratitis.
Eye injury. If one of your corneas has been damaged from an injury in the past, you may be more vulnerable to developing keratitis.
Potential complications of keratitis include: Chronic corneal inflammation and scarring, Chronic or recurrent viral infections of your cornea, Open sores on your cornea (corneal ulcers), Temporary or permanent reduction in your vision, Blindness.
Signs and symptoms of keratoconus may change as the disease progresses. They include: Blurred or distorted vision, Increased sensitivity to bright light and glare, which can cause problems with night driving, A need for frequent changes in eyeglass prescriptions, Sudden worsening or clouding of vision.
See your eye doctor (ophthalmologist or optometrist) if your eyesight is worsening rapidly, which might be caused by an irregular curvature of the eye (astigmatism). He or she may also look for signs of keratoconus during routine eye exams.
No one knows what causes keratoconus, although genetic and environmental factors are thought to be involved. Around 1 in 10 people with keratoconus also have a parent with the condition.
These factors can increase your chances of developing keratoconus: Having a family history of keratoconus, Rubbing your eyes vigorously, Having certain conditions, such as retinitis pigmentosa, Down syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, hay fever and asthma.
In some situations, your cornea may swell quickly and cause sudden reduced vision and scarring of the cornea. This is caused by a condition in which the inside lining of your cornea breaks down, allowing fluid to enter the cornea (hydrops). The swelling usually subsides by itself, but a scar may form that affects your vision.
Advanced keratoconus also may cause your cornea to become scarred, particularly where the cone is most prominent. A scarred cornea causes worsening vision problems and may require cornea transplant surgery.
Keratosis pilaris can occur at any age, but it's more common in young children. Signs and symptoms include: Painless tiny bumps, typically on the upper arms, thighs, cheeks or buttocks, Dry, rough skin in the areas with bumps, Worsening when seasonal changes cause low humidity and skin tends to be drier, Sandpaper-like bumps resembling goose flesh.
Treatment for keratosis pilaris usually isn't necessary. But if you're concerned about the appearance of your or your child's skin, consult your family doctor or a specialist in skin diseases (dermatologist). He or she can often make a diagnosis by examining the skin and the characteristic scaly bumps.
Keratosis pilaris results from the buildup of keratin — a hard protein that protects skin from harmful substances and infection. The keratin forms a scaly plug that blocks the opening of the hair follicle. Usually many plugs form, causing patches of rough, bumpy skin.
No one knows exactly why keratin builds up. But it may occur in association with genetic diseases or with other skin conditions, such as atopic dermatitis. Dry skin tends to worsen this condition.
Kidney cancer usually doesn't have signs or symptoms in its early stages. In time, signs and symptoms may develop, including: Blood in your urine, which may appear pink, red or cola colored, Pain in your back or side that doesn't go away, Loss of appetite, Unexplained weight loss, Tiredness, Fever.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes most kidney cancers.
Doctors know that kidney cancer begins when some kidney cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The changes tell the cells to grow and divide rapidly. The accumulating abnormal cells form a tumor that can extend beyond the kidney. Some cells can break off and spread (metastasize) to distant parts of the body.
Factors that can increase the risk of kidney cancer include:
Older age. Your risk of kidney cancer increases as you age.
Smoking. Smokers have a greater risk of kidney cancer than nonsmokers do. The risk decreases after you quit.
Obesity. People who are obese have a higher risk of kidney cancer than people who are considered to have a healthy weight.
High blood pressure (hypertension). High blood pressure increases your risk of kidney cancer.
Treatment for kidney failure. People who receive long-term dialysis to treat chronic kidney failure have a greater risk of developing kidney cancer.
Certain inherited syndromes. People who are born with certain inherited syndromes may have an increased risk of kidney cancer, such as those who have von Hippel-Lindau disease, Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome, tuberous sclerosis complex, hereditary papillary renal cell carcinoma or familial renal cancer.
Family history of kidney cancer. The risk of kidney cancer is higher if close family members have had the disease.
Simple kidney cysts typically don't cause signs or symptoms. If a simple kidney cyst grows large enough, symptoms may include: Dull pain in your back or side, Fever, Upper abdominal pain.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have signs or symptoms of a kidney cyst.
It's not clear what causes simple kidney cysts. One theory suggests that kidney cysts develop when the surface layer of the kidney weakens and forms a pouch (diverticulum). The pouch then fills with fluid, detaches and develops into a cyst.
The risk of having simple kidney cysts increases as you get older, though they can occur at any age. Simple kidney cysts are more common in men.
Kidney cysts can occasionally lead to complications, including:
An infected cyst. A kidney cyst may become infected, causing fever and pain.
A burst cyst. A kidney cyst that bursts causes severe pain in your back or side.
Urine obstruction. A kidney cyst that obstructs the normal flow of urine may lead to swelling of the kidney (hydronephrosis).
Signs and symptoms of a kidney infection might include: Fever, Chills, Back, side (flank) or groin pain, Abdominal pain, Frequent urination, Strong, persistent urge to urinate, Burning sensation or pain when urinating, Nausea and vomiting, Pus or blood in your urine (hematuria), Urine that smells bad or is cloudy.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have worrisome signs or symptoms. If you're being treated for a urinary tract infection but your signs and symptoms aren't improving, make an appointment.
Severe kidney infection can lead to life-threatening complications. Seek immediate medical attention if you have kidney infection symptoms combined with bloody urine or nausea and vomiting.
Bacteria that enter your urinary tract through the tube that carries urine from your body (urethra) can multiply and travel to your kidneys. This is the most common cause of kidney infections.
Bacteria from an infection elsewhere in your body also can spread through your bloodstream to your kidneys. Although it's unusual to develop a kidney infection, it can happen — for instance, if you have an artificial joint or heart valve that becomes infected.
Rarely, kidney infection results after kidney surgery.
Factors that increase your risk of a kidney infection include:
Being female. The urethra is shorter in women than it is in men, which makes it easier for bacteria to travel from outside the body to the bladder. The nearness of the urethra to the vagina and anus also creates more opportunities for bacteria to enter the bladder.
Once in the bladder, an infection can spread to the kidneys. Pregnant women are at even higher risk of a kidney infection.
Having a urinary tract blockage. This includes anything that slows the flow of urine or reduces your ability to empty your bladder when urinating — including a kidney stone, something abnormal in your urinary tract's structure or, in men, an enlarged prostate gland.
Having a weakened immune system. This includes medical conditions that impair your immune system, such as diabetes and HIV. Certain medications, such as drugs taken to prevent rejection of transplanted organs, have a similar effect.
Having damage to nerves around the bladder. Nerve or spinal cord damage can block the sensations of a bladder infection so that you're unaware when it's advancing to a kidney infection.
Using a urinary catheter for a time. Urinary catheters are tubes used to drain urine from the bladder. You might have a catheter placed during and after some surgical procedures and diagnostic tests. You might use one continuously if you're confined to a bed.
Having a condition that causes urine to flow the wrong way. In vesicoureteral reflux, small amounts of urine flow from your bladder back up into your ureters and kidneys. People with this condition are at higher risk of kidney infection during childhood and adulthood.
If left untreated, a kidney infection can lead to potentially serious complications, such as:
Kidney scarring. This can lead to chronic kidney disease, high blood pressure and kidney failure.
Blood poisoning (septicemia). Your kidneys filter waste from your blood and return your filtered blood to the rest of your body. Having a kidney infection can cause the bacteria to spread through your bloodstream.
Pregnancy complications. Women who develop a kidney infection during pregnancy may have an increased risk of delivering low birth weight babies.
A kidney stone usually will not cause symptoms until it moves around within your kidney or passes into your ureters — the tubes connecting the kidneys and the bladder. If it becomes lodged in the ureters, it may block the flow of urine and cause the kidney to swell and the ureter to spasm, which can be very painful. At that point, you may experience these signs and symptoms: Severe, sharp pain in the side and back, below the ribs, Pain that radiates to the lower abdomen and groin, Pain that comes in waves and fluctuates in intensity, Pain or burning sensation while urinating.
Other signs and symptoms may include: Pink, red or brown urine, Cloudy or foul-smelling urine, A persistent need to urinate, urinating more often than usual or urinating in small amounts, Nausea and vomiting, Fever and chills if an infection is present.
Pain caused by a kidney stone may change — for instance, shifting to a different location or increasing in intensity — as the stone moves through your urinary tract.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs and symptoms that worry you.
Seek immediate medical attention if you experience: Pain so severe that you can't sit still or find a comfortable position, Pain accompanied by nausea and vomiting, Pain accompanied by fever and chills, Blood in your urine, Difficulty passing urine.
Kidney stones often have no definite, single cause, although several factors may increase your risk.
Kidney stones form when your urine contains more crystal-forming substances — such as calcium, oxalate and uric acid — than the fluid in your urine can dilute. At the same time, your urine may lack substances that prevent crystals from sticking together, creating an ideal environment for kidney stones to form.
Knowing the type of kidney stone you have helps determine its cause, and may give clues on how to reduce your risk of getting more kidney stones. If possible, try to save your kidney stone if you pass one so that you can bring it to your doctor for analysis.
Types of kidney stones include:
Calcium stones. Most kidney stones are calcium stones, usually in the form of calcium oxalate. Oxalate is a substance made daily by your liver or absorbed from your diet. Certain fruits and vegetables, as well as nuts and chocolate, have high oxalate content.
Dietary factors, high doses of vitamin D, intestinal bypass surgery and several metabolic disorders can increase the concentration of calcium or oxalate in urine.
Calcium stones may also occur in the form of calcium phosphate. This type of stone is more common in metabolic conditions, such as renal tubular acidosis. It may also be associated with certain medications used to treat migraines or seizures, such as topiramate (Topamax, Trokendi XR, Qudexy XR).
Struvite stones. Struvite stones form in response to a urinary tract infection. These stones can grow quickly and become quite large, sometimes with few symptoms or little warning.
Uric acid stones. Uric acid stones can form in people who lose too much fluid because of chronic diarrhea or malabsorption, those who eat a high-protein diet, and those with diabetes or metabolic syndrome. Certain genetic factors also may increase your risk of uric acid stones.
Cystine stones. These stones form in people with a hereditary disorder called cystinuria that causes the kidneys to excrete too much of a specific amino acid.
Factors that increase your risk of developing kidney stones include:
Family or personal history. If someone in your family has had kidney stones, you're more likely to develop stones, too. If you've already had one or more kidney stones, you're at increased risk of developing another.
Dehydration. Not drinking enough water each day can increase your risk of kidney stones. People who live in warm, dry climates and those who sweat a lot may be at higher risk than others.
Certain diets. Eating a diet that's high in protein, sodium (salt) and sugar may increase your risk of some types of kidney stones. This is especially true with a high-sodium diet. Too much salt in your diet increases the amount of calcium your kidneys must filter and significantly increases your risk of kidney stones.
Obesity. High body mass index (BMI), large waist size and weight gain have been linked to an increased risk of kidney stones.
Digestive diseases and surgery. Gastric bypass surgery, inflammatory bowel disease or chronic diarrhea can cause changes in the digestive process that affect your absorption of calcium and water, increasing the amounts of stone-forming substances in your urine.
Other medical conditions such as renal tubular acidosis, cystinuria, hyperparathyroidism and repeated urinary tract infections also can increase your risk of kidney stones.
Certain supplements and medications, such as vitamin C, dietary supplements, laxatives (when used excessively), calcium-based antacids, and certain medications used to treat migraines or depression, can increase your risk of kidney stones.
Kleptomania symptoms may include: Inability to resist powerful urges to steal items that you don't need, Feeling increased tension, anxiety or arousal leading up to the theft, Feeling pleasure, relief or gratification while stealing, Feeling terrible guilt, remorse, self-loathing, shame or fear of arrest after the theft, Return of the urges and a repetition of the kleptomania cycle.
People with kleptomania typically exhibit these features or characteristics:
Unlike typical shoplifters, people with kleptomania don't compulsively steal for personal gain, on a dare, for revenge or out of rebellion. They steal simply because the urge is so powerful that they can't resist it.
Episodes of kleptomania generally occur spontaneously, usually without planning and without help or collaboration from another person.
Most people with kleptomania steal from public places, such as stores and supermarkets. Some may steal from friends or acquaintances, such as at a party.
Often, the stolen items have no value to the person with kleptomania, and the person can afford to buy them.
The stolen items are usually stashed away, never to be used. Items may also be donated, given away to family or friends, or even secretly returned to the place from which they were stolen.
Urges to steal may come and go or may occur with greater or lesser intensity over the course of time.
If you can't stop shoplifting or stealing, seek medical advice. Many people who may have kleptomania don't want to seek treatment because they're afraid they'll be arrested or jailed. However, a mental health professional typically doesn't report your thefts to authorities.
Some people seek medical help because they're afraid they'll get caught and have legal consequences. Or they've already been arrested, and they're legally required to seek treatment.
If you suspect a close friend or family member may have kleptomania, gently raise your concerns with your loved one. Keep in mind that kleptomania is a mental health condition, not a character flaw, so approach your loved one without blame or accusation.
It may be helpful to emphasize these points:
You're concerned because you care about your loved one's health and well-being.
You're worried about the risks of compulsive stealing, such as being arrested, losing a job or damaging a valued relationship.
You understand that, with kleptomania, the urge to steal may be too strong to resist just by "putting your mind to it."
Treatments are available that may help to minimize the urge to steal and live without addiction and shame.
If you need help preparing for this conversation, talk with your doctor. He or she may refer you to a mental health professional who can help you plan a way of raising your concerns without making your loved one feel defensive or threatened.
The cause of kleptomania is not known. Several theories suggest that changes in the brain may be at the root of kleptomania. More research is needed to better understand these possible causes, but kleptomania may be linked to:
Problems with a naturally occurring brain chemical (neurotransmitter) called serotonin. Serotonin helps regulate moods and emotions. Low levels of serotonin are common in people prone to impulsive behaviors.
Addictive disorders. Stealing may cause the release of dopamine (another neurotransmitter). Dopamine causes pleasurable feelings, and some people seek this rewarding feeling again and again.
The brain's opioid system. Urges are regulated by the brain's opioid system. An imbalance in this system could make it harder to resist urges.
Kleptomania is considered uncommon. However, some people with kleptomania may never seek treatment, or they're simply jailed after repeated thefts, so some cases of kleptomania may never be diagnosed. Kleptomania often begins during the teen years or in young adulthood, but can start in adulthood or later. About two-thirds of people with known kleptomania are women.
Kleptomania risk factors may include:
Family history. Having a first-degree relative, such as a parent or sibling, with kleptomania, obsessive-compulsive disorder, or an alcohol or other substance use disorder may increase the risk of kleptomania.
Having another mental illness. People with kleptomania often have another mental illness, such as bipolar disorder, anxiety disorder, an eating disorder, substance use disorder or a personality disorder.
Left untreated, kleptomania can result in severe emotional, family, work, legal and financial problems. For example, you know stealing is wrong but you feel powerless to resist the impulse, so you may be wracked by guilt, shame, self-loathing and humiliation. And you may be arrested for stealing. You may otherwise lead a moral, upstanding life and be confused and upset by your compulsive stealing.
Other complications and conditions associated with kleptomania may include: Other impulse-control disorders, such as compulsive gambling or shopping, Alcohol and substance misuse, Personality disorders, Eating disorders, Depression, Bipolar disorder, Anxiety, Suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts and suicide.
Signs and symptoms of Klinefelter syndrome vary widely among males with the disorder. Many boys with Klinefelter syndrome show few or only mild signs. The condition may go undiagnosed until adulthood or it may never be diagnosed. For others, the condition has a noticeable effect on growth or appearance.
Signs and symptoms of Klinefelter syndrome also vary by age.
Signs and symptoms may include: Weak muscles, Slow motor development — taking longer than average to sit up, crawl and walk, Delay in speaking, Problems at birth, such as testicles that haven't descended into the scrotum.
Signs and symptoms may include: Taller than average stature, Longer legs, shorter torso and broader hips compared with other boys, Absent, delayed or incomplete puberty, After puberty, less muscle and less facial and body hair compared with other teens, Small, firm testicles, Small penis, Enlarged breast tissue (gynecomastia), Weak bones, Low energy levels, Tendency to be shy and sensitive, Difficulty expressing thoughts and feelings or socializing, Problems with reading, writing, spelling or math.
Signs and symptoms may include: Low sperm count or no sperm, Small testicles and penis, Low sex drive, Taller than average height, Weak bones, Decreased facial and body hair, Less muscular compared with other men, Enlarged breast tissue, Increased belly fat.
See a doctor if you or your son has:
Slow development during infancy or boyhood. Delays in growth and development can be the first sign of a number of conditions that need treatment — including Klinefelter syndrome. Though some variation in physical and mental development is normal, it's best to check with a doctor if you have any concerns.
Male infertility. Many men with Klinefelter syndrome aren't diagnosed with infertility until they realize they're unable to father a child.
Klinefelter syndrome occurs as a result of a random error that causes a male to be born with an extra sex chromosome. It isn't an inherited condition.
Humans have 46 chromosomes, including two sex chromosomes that determine a person's sex. Females have two X sex chromosomes (XX). Males have an X and a Y sex chromosome (XY).
Klinefelter syndrome can be caused by: One extra copy of the X chromosome in each cell (XXY), the most common cause, An extra X chromosome in some of the cells (mosaic Klinefelter syndrome), with fewer symptoms, More than one extra copy of the X chromosome, which is rare and results in a severe form.
Extra copies of genes on the X chromosome can interfere with male sexual development and fertility.
Klinefelter syndrome stems from a random genetic event. The risk of Klinefelter syndrome isn't increased by anything a parent does or doesn't do. For older mothers, the risk is higher but only slightly.
Klinefelter syndrome may increase the risk of: Anxiety and depression, Social, emotional and behavioral problems, such as low self-esteem, emotional immaturity and impulsiveness, Infertility and problems with sexual function, Weak bones (osteoporosis), Heart and blood vessel disease, Breast cancer and certain other cancers, Lung disease, Metabolic syndrome, which includes type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure (hypertension), and high cholesterol and triglycerides (hyperlipidemia), Autoimmune disorders such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, Tooth and oral problems that make dental cavities more likely, Autism spectrum disorder.
A number of complications caused by Klinefelter syndrome are related to low testosterone (hypogonadism). Testosterone replacement therapy reduces the risk of certain health problems, especially when therapy is started at the beginning of puberty.
People who have Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome may have the following features, which can range from mild to more extensive:
Port-wine stain. This pink to reddish-purple birthmark is caused by extra tiny blood vessels (capillaries) in the top layer of skin. The birthmark usually covers part of one leg, but can involve any portion of the skin, and may get darker or lighter with age.
Vein malformations. These include swollen, twisted veins (varicose veins) usually on the surface of the legs. Deeper abnormal veins in the arms, legs, abdomen and pelvis can occur. There may be spongy tissue filled with small veins in or under the skin. Venous abnormalities may become more prominent with age.
Overgrowth of bones and soft tissue. This begins in infancy and is usually limited to one leg, but it can occur in an arm or, rarely, in the trunk or face. This overgrowth of bone and tissue creates a larger and longer extremity. Rarely, fusion of fingers or toes, or having extra fingers or toes occurs.
Lymphatic system abnormalities. The lymphatic system — part of the immune system that protects against infection and disease and transports lymphatic fluid — can be abnormal. Extra lymphatic vessels can be present that don't work properly and can lead to leakage and swelling.
Other conditions. KTS can also include cataracts, glaucoma, hip dislocation at birth and blood-clotting problems.
Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome is usually identified at birth. It's important to get a prompt, accurate diagnosis and appropriate care to treat symptoms and prevent complications.
Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome is a genetic condition. It involves genetic changes (mutations) most commonly in the PIK3CA gene. These genetic changes are responsible for development of tissues in the body, resulting in overgrowth.
KTS is not usually inherited. The gene mutations occur randomly during cell division in early development before birth.
Family history doesn't seem to be a risk factor, so it's unlikely that parents of one child with Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome will have another child with the disorder, even if one of the parents has KTS.
Complications of Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome can result from abnormal development of blood vessels, soft tissues, bones and the lymphatic system. These can include:
Port-wine stain complications. Some areas of the port-wine stain may thicken over time and may form blisters (blebs) that are prone to bleeding and infections.
Vein malformations. Varicose veins can cause major pain and skin ulcers due to poor circulation. Deeper abnormal veins can increase the risk of blood clots (deep vein thrombosis) and cause a life-threatening condition called pulmonary embolism if they dislodge and travel to the lungs. Venous malformations in the pelvis and abdominal organs can cause internal bleeding. Superficial veins can develop less serious but painful clots and inflammation (superficial thrombophlebitis).
Overgrowth of bones and soft tissue. Overgrowth of bone and tissue can cause pain, a feeling of heaviness, enlargement of the limb and problems with movement. Overgrowth that causes one leg to be longer than the other can cause problems with walking and may lead to hip and back problems.
Lymphatic system abnormalities. An abnormality can cause fluid buildup and swelling in the tissues of the arms or legs (lymphedema), skin breakdown and skin ulcers, the development of small masses (lymphatic cysts) in the spleen, leakage of lymphatic fluid, or infection of the layer under the skin (cellulitis).
Chronic pain. Pain can be a common problem that results from complications such as infections, swelling or vein problems.
Knee bursitis signs and symptoms vary, depending on which bursa is affected and what's causing the inflammation.
In general, the affected portion of your knee might feel warm, tender and swollen when you put pressure on it. You might also feel pain when you move or even at rest.
A sharp blow to the knee can cause symptoms to appear rapidly. But most cases of knee bursitis result from friction and irritation of the bursa that occurs in jobs that require a lot of kneeling on hard surfaces — so symptoms usually begin gradually and can worsen over time.
The bursa that lies over your kneecap can sometimes become infected. Call your doctor if you have a fever in addition to pain and swelling in your knee.
Knee bursitis can be caused by: Frequent and sustained pressure, such as from kneeling, especially on hard surfaces, Overuse or strenuous activity, A direct blow to your knee, Bacterial infection of the bursa, Complications from osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis or gout in your knee.
Knee bursitis is a common complaint, but your risk of developing this painful disorder can increase from:
Prolonged kneeling. People who work on their knees for long periods — carpet layers, plumbers and gardeners — are at increased risk of knee bursitis.
Participation in certain sports. Sports that result in direct blows or frequent falls on the knee — such as wrestling, football and volleyball — can increase your risk of knee bursitis. Runners can develop pain and inflammation in the pes anserine bursa, situated on the inner side of your knee below the joint.
Obesity and osteoarthritis. Pes anserine bursitis, affecting the inner side of your knee below the joint, often occurs in obese women with osteoarthritis.
The location and severity of knee pain may vary, depending on the cause of the problem. Signs and symptoms that sometimes accompany knee pain include: Swelling and stiffness, Redness and warmth to the touch, Weakness or instability, Popping or crunching noises, Inability to fully straighten the knee.
Call your doctor if you: Can't bear weight on your knee or feel as if your knee is unstable (gives out), Have marked knee swelling, Are unable to fully extend or flex your knee, See an obvious deformity in your leg or knee, Have a fever, in addition to redness, pain and swelling in your knee, Have severe knee pain that is associated with an injury.
Knee pain can be caused by injuries, mechanical problems, types of arthritis and other problems.
A knee injury can affect any of the ligaments, tendons or fluid-filled sacs (bursae) that surround your knee joint as well as the bones, cartilage and ligaments that form the joint itself. Some of the more common knee injuries include:
ACL injury. An ACL injury is a tear of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) — one of four ligaments that connect your shinbone to your thighbone. An ACL injury is particularly common in people who play basketball, soccer or other sports that require sudden changes in direction.
Fractures. The bones of the knee, including the kneecap (patella), can be broken during motor vehicle collisions or falls. People whose bones have been weakened by osteoporosis can sometimes sustain a knee fracture simply by stepping wrong.
Torn meniscus. The meniscus is formed of tough, rubbery cartilage and acts as a shock absorber between your shinbone and thighbone. It can be torn if you suddenly twist your knee while bearing weight on it.
Knee bursitis. Some knee injuries cause inflammation in the bursae, the small sacs of fluid that cushion the outside of your knee joint so that tendons and ligaments glide smoothly over the joint.
Patellar tendinitis. Tendinitis is irritation and inflammation of one or more tendons — the thick, fibrous tissues that attach muscles to bones. Runners, skiers, cyclists, and those involved in jumping sports and activities may develop inflammation in the patellar tendon, which connects the quadriceps muscle on the front of the thigh to the shinbone.
Some examples of mechanical problems that can cause knee pain include:
Loose body. Sometimes injury or degeneration of bone or cartilage can cause a piece of bone or cartilage to break off and float in the joint space. This may not create any problems unless the loose body interferes with knee joint movement, in which case the effect is something like a pencil caught in a door hinge.
Iliotibial band syndrome. This occurs when the tough band of tissue that extends from the outside of your hip to the outside of your knee (iliotibial band) becomes so tight that it rubs against the outer portion of your femur. Distance runners and cyclists are especially susceptible to iliotibial band syndrome.
Dislocated kneecap. This occurs when the triangular bone (patella) that covers the front of your knee slips out of place, usually to the outside of your knee. In some cases, the kneecap may stay displaced and you'll be able to see the dislocation.
Hip or foot pain. If you have hip or foot pain, you may change the way you walk to spare these painful joints. But this altered gait can place more stress on your knee joint. In some cases, problems in the hip or foot can cause knee pain.
More than 100 different types of arthritis exist. The varieties most likely to affect the knee include:
Osteoarthritis. Sometimes called degenerative arthritis, osteoarthritis is the most common type of arthritis. It's a wear-and-tear condition that occurs when the cartilage in your knee deteriorates with use and age.
Rheumatoid arthritis. The most debilitating form of arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune condition that can affect almost any joint in your body, including your knees. Although rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic disease, it tends to vary in severity and may even come and go.
Gout. This type of arthritis occurs when uric acid crystals build up in the joint. While gout most commonly affects the big toe, it can also occur in the knee.
Pseudogout. Often mistaken for gout, pseudogout is caused by calcium-containing crystals that develop in the joint fluid. Knees are the most common joint affected by pseudogout.
Septic arthritis. Sometimes your knee joint can become infected, leading to swelling, pain and redness. Septic arthritis often occurs with a fever, and there's usually no trauma before the onset of pain. Septic arthritis can quickly cause extensive damage to the knee cartilage. If you have knee pain with any of these symptoms, see your doctor right away.
Patellofemoral pain syndrome is a general term that refers to pain arising between the kneecap (patella) and the underlying thighbone (femur). It's common in athletes; in young adults, especially those who have a slight maltracking of the kneecap; and in older adults, who usually develop the condition as a result of arthritis of the kneecap.
A number of factors can increase your risk of having knee problems, including:
Excess weight. Being overweight or obese increases stress on your knee joints, even during ordinary activities such as walking or going up and down stairs. It also puts you at increased risk of osteoarthritis by accelerating the breakdown of joint cartilage.
Lack of muscle flexibility or strength. A lack of strength and flexibility can increase the risk of knee injuries. Strong muscles help to stabilize and protect your joints, and muscle flexibility can help you achieve full range of motion.
Certain sports or occupations. Some sports put greater stress on your knees than do others. Alpine skiing with its rigid ski boots and potential for falls, basketball's jumps and pivots, and the repeated pounding your knees take when you run or jog all increase your risk of knee injury. Jobs that require repetitive stress on the knees such as construction or farming also can increase your risk.
Previous injury. Having a previous knee injury makes it more likely that you'll injure your knee again.
Not all knee pain is serious. But some knee injuries and medical conditions, such as osteoarthritis, can lead to increasing pain, joint damage and disability if left untreated. And having a knee injury — even a minor one — makes it more likely that you'll have similar injuries in the future.
In most cases, the signs and symptoms of Krabbe disease appear during the first 2 to 5 months of life. They begin gradually and progressively worsen.
Common signs and symptoms early in the course of the disease include the following: Feeding difficulties, Unexplained crying, Extreme irritability, Fever with no sign of infection, Declines in alertness, Delays in typical developmental milestones, Muscle spasms, Loss of head control, Frequent vomiting.
As the disease progresses, signs and symptoms become more severe. They may include: Seizures, Loss of developmental abilities, Progressive loss of hearing and sight, Rigid, constricted muscles, Stiff, fixed posture, Progressive loss of ability to swallow and breathe.
When Krabbe disease develops later in childhood or during adulthood, signs and symptoms can vary widely. They may include: Progressive loss of vision, Difficulty walking (ataxia), Decline in thinking skills, Loss of manual dexterity, Muscle weakness.
As a general rule, the younger the age that Krabbe disease occurs, the faster the disease progresses and the more likely it is to result in death.
Some people diagnosed during adolescence or adulthood may have less severe symptoms, with muscle weakness as a primary condition. They may have no impairment of their thinking skills.
The early signs and symptoms of Krabbe disease in infancy can indicate any number of diseases or developmental problems. Therefore, it's important to get a prompt and accurate diagnosis if your child is having signs or symptoms of the disease.
Signs and symptoms most often associated with older children and adults also are not specific to Krabbe disease and require a timely diagnosis.
Krabbe disease is caused when a person inherits two copies of an altered (mutated) gene — one copy from each parent.
A gene provides a kind of blueprint for producing proteins. If there is an error in this blueprint, then the protein product may not work properly. In the case of Krabbe disease, two mutated copies of a particular gene result in little or no production of an enzyme called galactocerebrosidase (GALC).
Enzymes, such as GALC, are responsible for breaking down certain substances in a cell's recycling center (lysosome). In Krabbe disease, the short supply of GALC enzymes results in the accumulation of certain types of fats called galactolipids.
Galactolipids normally exist in cells that produce and maintain the protective coating of nerve cells (myelin). However, an abundance of galactolipids has a toxic effect. Some galactolipids trigger myelin-forming cells to self-destruct.
Other galactolipids are taken up by specialized debris-eating cells in the nervous system called microglia. The process of cleaning up excessive galactolipids transforms these normally helpful cells into abnormal, toxic cells called globoid cells, which promote myelin-damaging inflammation.
The subsequent loss of myelin (demyelination) prevents nerve cells from sending and receiving messages.
The gene mutation associated with Krabbe disease only causes the disease if two mutated copies of the gene are inherited. A disease resulting from two mutated copies is called an autosomal recessive disorder.
If each parent has one mutated copy of the gene, the risk for a child would be as follows: A 25 percent chance of inheriting two mutated copies, which would result in the disease, A 50 percent chance of inheriting only one mutated copy, which would result in the child being a carrier of the mutation but would not result in the disease itself, A 25 percent chance of inheriting two normal copies of the gene.
Genetic testing to understand the risk of having a child with Krabbe disease may be considered in certain situations:
If one or both parents are likely carriers of a GALC gene mutation because of a known family history of Krabbe disease, a couple may want to have tests to understand the risks in their own family.
If one child is diagnosed with Krabbe disease, a family may consider genetic tests to identify other children who could develop the disease later in life.
If the parents are known carriers, they may request a prenatal genetic test to determine if their child is likely to develop the disease.
Known carriers, who are using in vitro fertilization, may request a genetic test with fertilized eggs before implantation.
Genetic testing should be carefully considered. Ask your doctor about genetic counseling services that can help you understand the benefits, limits and implications of genetic testing.
A number of complications — including infections and respiratory difficulties — can develop in children with advanced Krabbe disease. In the later stages of the disease, children become incapacitated, are confined to their beds and eventually lapse into a vegetative state.
Most children who develop Krabbe disease in infancy die before the age of 2, most often from respiratory failure or complications of immobility and markedly decreased muscle tone. Children who develop the disease later in childhood may have a somewhat longer life expectancy, usually between two and seven years after diagnosis.
Mild kyphosis may produce no noticeable signs or symptoms. But some people experience back pain and stiffness in addition to an abnormally curved spine.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice an increased curve in your upper back or in your child's spine.
The individual bones (vertebrae) that make up a healthy spine look like cylinders stacked in a column. Kyphosis occurs when the vertebrae in the upper back become more wedge shaped.
Abnormal vertebrae can be caused by:
Fractures. Broken or crushed vertebrae (compression fractures) can result in curvature of the spine. Mild compression fractures often don't produce noticeable signs or symptoms.
Osteoporosis. This bone-thinning disorder can cause spinal curvature, especially if weakened vertebrae result in compression fractures. Osteoporosis is most common in older women and people who have taken corticosteroids for long periods of time.
Disk degeneration. Soft, circular disks act as cushions between spinal vertebrae. With age, these disks dry out and shrink, which often worsens kyphosis.
Scheuermann's disease. Also called Scheuermann's kyphosis, this disease typically begins during the growth spurt that occurs before puberty. Boys are affected more often than girls.
Birth defects. Spinal bones that don't develop properly before birth can cause kyphosis.
Syndromes. Kyphosis in children can also be associated with certain syndromes, such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and Marfan syndrome.
Cancer and cancer treatments. Cancer in the spine can weaken vertebrae and make them more prone to compression fractures, as can chemotherapy and radiation cancer treatments.
In addition to causing back pain, kyphosis may cause:
Breathing problems. Severe kyphosis can put pressure on the lungs.
Limited physical functions. Kyphosis is associated with weakened back muscles and difficulty doing tasks such as walking and getting out of chairs. The spinal curvature can also make it difficult to gaze upward or drive and can cause pain when you lie down.
Digestive problems. Severe kyphosis can compress the digestive tract, causing problems such as acid reflux and difficulty with swallowing.
Body image problems. People with kyphosis, especially adolescents, may develop a poor body image from having a rounded back or from wearing a brace to correct the condition. For older people, poor body image can lead to social isolation.
The signs and symptoms of lactose intolerance usually begin from 30 minutes to two hours after eating or drinking foods that contain lactose. Common signs and symptoms include: Diarrhea, Nausea, and sometimes, vomiting, Stomach cramps, Bloating, Gas.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you frequently have symptoms of lactose intolerance after eating dairy foods, particularly if you're worried about getting enough calcium.
Lactose intolerance occurs when your small intestine doesn't produce enough of an enzyme (lactase) to digest milk sugar (lactose).
Normally, lactase turns milk sugar into two simple sugars — glucose and galactose — which are absorbed into the bloodstream through the intestinal lining.
If you're lactase deficient, lactose in your food moves into the colon instead of being processed and absorbed. In the colon, normal bacteria interact with undigested lactose, causing the signs and symptoms of lactose intolerance.
There are three types of lactose intolerance. Different factors cause the lactase deficiency underlying each type.
People who develop primary lactose intolerance — the most common type — start life producing enough lactase. Infants, who get all their nutrition from milk, need lactase.
As children replace milk with other foods, the amount of lactase they produce normally drops, but usually remains high enough to digest the amount of dairy in a typical adult diet. In primary lactose intolerance, lactase production falls off sharply by adulthood, making milk products difficult to digest.
This form of lactose intolerance occurs when your small intestine decreases lactase production after an illness, injury or surgery involving your small intestine. Diseases associated with secondary lactose intolerance include intestinal infection, celiac disease, bacterial overgrowth and Crohn's disease.
Treatment of the underlying disorder might restore lactase levels and improve signs and symptoms, though it can take time.
It's possible, but rare, for babies to be born with lactose intolerance caused by a lack of lactase. This disorder is passed from generation to generation in a pattern of inheritance called autosomal recessive, meaning that both the mother and the father must pass on the same gene variant for a child to be affected. Premature infants can also have lactose intolerance because of an insufficient lactase level.
Factors that can make you or your child more prone to lactose intolerance include:
Increasing age. Lactose intolerance usually appears in adulthood. The condition is uncommon in babies and young children.
Ethnicity. Lactose intolerance is most common in people of African, Asian, Hispanic and American Indian descent.
Premature birth. Infants born prematurely might have reduced levels of lactase because the small intestine doesn't develop lactase-producing cells until late in the third trimester.
Diseases affecting the small intestine. Small intestine problems that can cause lactose intolerance include bacterial overgrowth, celiac disease and Crohn's disease.
Certain cancer treatments. If you've had radiation therapy for cancer in your stomach or you have intestinal complications from chemotherapy, your risk of developing lactose intolerance increases.
In most cases laryngitis symptoms last less than a couple of weeks and are caused by something minor, such as a virus. Less often, laryngitis symptoms are caused by something more serious or long lasting. Laryngitis signs and symptoms can include: Hoarseness, Weak voice or voice loss, Tickling sensation and rawness in your throat, Sore throat, Dry throat, Dry cough.
You can manage most acute cases of laryngitis with self-care steps, such as resting your voice and drinking plenty of fluids. Strenuous use of your voice during an episode of acute laryngitis can damage your vocal cords.
Make an appointment with a doctor if your laryngitis symptoms last more than two weeks. Have trouble breathing, Cough up blood, Have a fever that won't go away, Have increasing pain over weeks.
Makes noisy, high-pitched breathing sounds when inhaling (stridor), Drools more than usual, Has trouble swallowing, Has difficulty breathing, Has a fever.
These signs and symptoms may indicate croup — inflammation of the larynx and the airway just beneath it. Although croup can usually be treated at home, severe symptoms require medical attention. These symptoms can also indicate epiglottitis, an inflammation of the tissue that acts as a lid (epiglottis) to cover the windpipe (trachea), which can be life-threatening for children and adults.
Most cases of laryngitis are temporary and improve after the underlying cause gets better. Causes of acute laryngitis include: Viral infections similar to those that cause a cold, Vocal strain, caused by yelling or overusing your voice, Bacterial infections, although these are less common.
Laryngitis that lasts longer than three weeks is known as chronic laryngitis. This type of laryngitis is generally caused by exposure to irritants over time. Chronic laryngitis can cause vocal cord strain and injuries or growths on the vocal cords (polyps or nodules). Chronic laryngitis can be caused by: Inhaled irritants, such as chemical fumes, allergens or smoke, Acid reflux, also called gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), Chronic sinusitis, Excessive alcohol use, Habitual overuse of your voice (such as in singers or cheerleaders), Smoking.
Less common causes of chronic laryngitis include: Bacterial or fungal infections, Infections with certain parasites.
Other causes of chronic hoarseness include: Cancer, Vocal cord paralysis, which can result from nerve injury due to surgery, injury to the chest or neck, cancer, nerve disorders, or other health conditions, Bowing of the vocal cords.
Risk factors for laryngitis include: Having a respiratory infection, such as a cold, bronchitis or sinusitis, Exposure to irritating substances, such as cigarette smoke, excessive alcohol intake, stomach acid or workplace chemicals, Overusing your voice, by speaking too much, speaking too loudly, shouting or singing.
In some cases of laryngitis caused by infection, the infection may spread to other parts of the respiratory tract.
If you're allergic to latex, you're likely to have symptoms after touching latex rubber products, such as gloves or balloons. You can also have symptoms if you breathe in latex particles that are released into the air when someone removes latex gloves.
Latex allergy symptoms range from mild to severe. A reaction depends on how sensitive you are to latex and the amount of latex you touch or inhale. Your reaction can become worse with each additional latex exposure.
Mild latex allergy symptoms include: Itching, Skin redness, Hives or rash.
These include: Sneezing, Runny nose, Itchy, watery eyes, Scratchy throat, Difficulty breathing, Wheezing, Cough.
The most serious allergic reaction to latex is anaphylaxis, which can be deadly. An anaphylactic (an-uh-fuh-LAK-tik) reaction develops immediately after latex exposure in highly sensitive people, but it rarely happens the first time you're exposed.
Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include: Difficulty breathing, Hives or swelling, Nausea and vomiting, Wheezing, Drop in blood pressure, Dizziness, Loss of consciousness, Confusion, Rapid or weak pulse.
Seek emergency medical care if you are having or think you're having an anaphylactic reaction.
If you have less severe reactions after exposure to latex, talk to your doctor. If possible, see your doctor when you're reacting, which will aid in diagnosis.
In a latex allergy, your immune system identifies latex as a harmful substance and triggers certain antibodies to fight it off. The next time you're exposed to latex, these antibodies tell your immune system to release histamine and other chemicals into your bloodstream, producing a range of allergy signs and symptoms. The more times you are exposed to latex, the more strongly your immune system is likely to respond. This is called sensitization.
Latex allergy can occur in these ways:
Direct contact. The most common cause of latex allergy involves touching latex-containing products, including latex gloves, condoms and balloons.
Inhalation. Latex products, especially gloves, release latex particles, which you can breathe in when they become airborne. The amount of airborne latex from gloves differs greatly depending on the brand of glove used.
It's possible to have other skin reactions when using latex. They include:
Allergic contact dermatitis. This reaction results from the chemical additives used during manufacturing. The main sign is a skin rash with formation of blisters 24 to 48 hours after exposure, similar to poison ivy.
Irritant contact dermatitis. Not an allergy, this skin irritation is caused by wearing rubber gloves or exposure to the powder inside them. Signs and symptoms include dry, itchy, irritated areas, usually on the hands.
Not all latex products are made from natural sources. Products containing man-made (synthetic) latex, such as latex paint, are unlikely to cause a reaction.
Certain people are at greater risk of developing a latex allergy:
People with spina bifida. The risk of latex allergy is highest in people with spina bifida — a birth defect that affects the development of the spine. People with this disorder often are exposed to latex products through early and frequent health care. People with spina bifida should always avoid latex products.
People who undergo multiple surgeries or medical procedures. Repeated exposure to latex gloves and medical products increases your risk of developing latex allergy.
Health care workers. If you work in health care, you're at increased risk of developing a latex allergy.
Rubber industry workers. Repeated exposure to latex may increase sensitivity.
People with a personal or family history of allergies. You're at increased risk of latex allergy if you have other allergies — such as hay fever or a food allergy — or they're common in your family.
Certain fruits contain the same allergens found in latex. They include: Avocado, Banana, Chestnut, Kiwi, Passion fruit.
If you're allergic to latex, you have a greater chance of also being allergic to these foods.
Signs and symptoms of lazy eye include: An eye that wanders inward or outward, Eyes that appear to not work together, Poor depth perception, Squinting or shutting an eye, Head tilting, Abnormal results of vision screening tests.
Sometimes lazy eye is not evident without an eye exam.
See your child's doctor if you notice his or her eye wandering after the first few weeks of life. A vision check is especially important if there's a family history of crossed eyes, childhood cataracts or other eye conditions.
For all children, a complete eye exam is recommended between ages 3 and 5.
Lazy eye develops because of abnormal visual experience early in life that changes the nerve pathways between a thin layer of tissue (retina) at the back of the eye and the brain. The weaker eye receives fewer visual signals. Eventually, the eyes' ability to work together decreases, and the brain suppresses or ignores input from the weaker eye.
Anything that blurs a child's vision or causes the eyes to cross or turn out can result in lazy eye. Common causes of the condition include:
Muscle imbalance (strabismus amblyopia). The most common cause of lazy eye is an imbalance in the muscles that position the eyes. This imbalance can cause the eyes to cross in or turn out, and prevents them from working together.
Difference in sharpness of vision between the eyes (refractive amblyopia). A significant difference between the prescriptions in each eye — often due to farsightedness but sometimes to nearsightedness or an uneven surface curve of the eye (astigmatism) — can result in lazy eye.
Glasses or contact lenses are typically used to correct these refractive problems. In some children lazy eye is caused by a combination of strabismus and refractive problems.
Deprivation. A problem with one eye — such as a cloudy area in the lens (cataract) — can prohibit clear vision in that eye. Deprivation amblyopia in infancy requires urgent treatment to prevent permanent vision loss. It's often the most severe type of amblyopia.
Factors associated with an increased risk of lazy eye include: Premature birth, Small size at birth, Family history of lazy eye, Developmental disabilities.
Untreated, lazy eye can cause permanent vision loss.
Initially, lead poisoning can be hard to detect — even people who seem healthy can have high blood levels of lead. Signs and symptoms usually don't appear until dangerous amounts have accumulated.
Signs and symptoms of lead poisoning in children include: Developmental delay, Learning difficulties, Irritability, Loss of appetite, Weight loss, Sluggishness and fatigue, Abdominal pain, Vomiting, Constipation, Hearing loss, Seizures, Eating things, such as paint chips, that aren't food (pica).
Babies exposed to lead before birth might: Be born prematurely, Have lower birth weight, Have slowed growth.
Although children are primarily at risk, lead poisoning is also dangerous for adults. Signs and symptoms in adults might include: High blood pressure, Joint and muscle pain, Difficulties with memory or concentration, Headache, Abdominal pain, Mood disorders, Reduced sperm count and abnormal sperm, Miscarriage, stillbirth or premature birth in pregnant women.
Lead is a metal that occurs naturally in the earth's crust, but human activity — mining, burning fossil fuels and manufacturing — has caused it to become more widespread. Lead was also once used in paint and gasoline and is still used in batteries, solder, pipes, pottery, roofing materials and some cosmetics.
Lead-based paints for homes, children's toys and household furniture have been banned in the United States since 1978. But lead-based paint is still on walls and woodwork in many older homes and apartments. Most lead poisoning in children results from eating chips of deteriorating lead-based paint.
Lead pipes, brass plumbing fixtures and copper pipes soldered with lead can release lead particles into tap water. Lead solder in food cans, banned in the United States, is still used in some countries.
Lead sometimes can also be found in:
Soil. Lead particles from leaded gasoline or paint settle on soil and can last years. Lead-contaminated soil is still a major problem around highways and in some urban settings. Some soil close to walls of older houses contains lead.
Household dust. Household dust can contain lead from lead paint chips or from contaminated soil brought in from outside.
Pottery. Glazes found on some ceramics, china and porcelain can contain lead that can leach into food served or stored in the pottery.
Toys. Lead is sometimes found in toys and other products produced abroad.
Cosmetics. Tiro, an eye cosmetic from Nigeria, has been linked to lead poisoning.
Herbal or folk remedies. Lead poisoning has been linked to greta and azarcon, traditional Hispanic medicines, as well as some from India, China and other countries.
Mexican candy. Tamarind, an ingredient used in some candies made in Mexico, might contain lead.
Lead bullets. Time spent at firing ranges can lead to exposure.
Occupations. People are exposed to lead and can bring it home on their clothes when they work in auto repair, mining, pipe fitting, battery manufacturing, painting, construction and certain other fields.
Factors that may increase your risk of lead poisoning include:
Age. Infants and young children are more likely to be exposed to lead than are older children. They might chew paint that flakes off walls and woodwork, and their hands can be contaminated with lead dust. Young children also absorb lead more easily, and it's more harmful for them than it is for adults and older children.
Living in an older home. Although the use of lead-based paints has been banned since the 1970s, older homes and buildings often retain remnants of this paint. People renovating an older home are at even higher risk.
Certain hobbies. Making stained glass and some jewelry requires the use of lead solder. Refinishing old furniture might put you in contact with layers of lead paint.
Living in developing countries. Developing countries often have less strict rules regarding exposure to lead than do developed countries. American families who adopt a child from another country might want to have the child's blood tested for lead poisoning. Immigrant and refugee children also should be tested.
Lead can harm an unborn child, so pregnant women or women likely to become pregnant should be especially careful to avoid exposure to lead.
Exposure to even low levels of lead can cause damage over time, especially in children. The greatest risk is to brain development, where irreversible damage can occur. Higher levels can damage the kidneys and nervous system in both children and adults. Very high lead levels may cause seizures, unconsciousness and death.
Left ventricular hypertrophy usually develops gradually. You may experience no signs or symptoms, especially during the early stages of the condition.
As left ventricular hypertrophy progresses, you may experience: Shortness of breath, Fatigue, Chest pain, often after exercising, Sensation of rapid, fluttering or pounding heartbeats (palpitations), Dizziness or fainting.
Seek emergency care if: You feel chest pain that lasts more than a few minutes, You have severe difficulty breathing, You have severe lightheadedness or lose consciousness.
If you experience mild shortness of breath or other symptoms, such as palpitations, see your doctor.
If you have high blood pressure or another condition that increases your risk of left ventricular hypertrophy, your doctor is likely to recommend regular appointments to monitor your heart. Even if you feel well, you need to have your blood pressure checked annually, or more often if you: Smoke, Are overweight, Have other conditions that increase the risk of high blood pressure.
Left ventricular hypertrophy can occur when some factor makes your heart work harder than normal to pump blood to your body.
Factors that can cause your heart to work harder include:
High blood pressure (hypertension). This is the most common cause of left ventricular hypertrophy. More than one-third of people show evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy at the time of their diagnosis with hypertension.
Aortic valve stenosis. This disease is a narrowing of the aortic valve that separates the left ventricle from the large blood vessel leaving your heart (aorta). The narrowing of the aortic valve requires the left ventricle to work harder to pump blood into the aorta.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This genetic disease occurs when the heart muscle becomes abnormally thick, even with completely normal blood pressure, making it harder for the heart to pump blood.
Athletic training. Intense, prolonged endurance and strength training can cause the heart to adapt to handle the extra workload. It's unclear whether this athletic type of left ventricle hypertrophy can lead to stiffening of the heart muscle and disease.
In addition to hypertension and aortic valve stenosis, factors that increase your risk of left ventricular hypertrophy include:
Age. Left ventricular hypertrophy is more common in older people.
Weight. Being overweight increases your risk of high blood pressure and left ventricular hypertrophy.
Family history. Certain genetic conditions are associated with developing left ventricular hypertrophy.
Diabetes. Left ventricular hypertrophy has been found to be linked to a higher risk of diabetes.
Race. African-Americans are at higher risk of left ventricular hypertrophy than are white people with similar blood pressure measurements.
Sex. Women with hypertension are at higher risk of left ventricular hypertrophy than are men with similar blood pressure measurements.
Left ventricular hypertrophy changes the structure and working of the heart. The enlarged left ventricle can: Weaken, Stiffen and lose elasticity, preventing the chamber from filling properly and increasing pressure in the heart, Compress the chamber's blood vessels (coronary arteries) and restrict its supply of blood.
As a result of these changes, complications of left ventricular hypertrophy include: Reduced blood supply to the heart, Inability of the heart to pump enough blood to your body (heart failure), Abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia), Irregular, often rapid heartbeat (atrial fibrillation) that decreases blood flow to the body, Insufficient supply of oxygen to the heart (ischemic heart disease), Stroke, Sudden, unexpected loss of heart function, breathing and consciousness (sudden cardiac arrest).
Signs and symptoms of Legg-Calve-Perthes disease include: Limping, Pain or stiffness in the hip, groin, thigh or knee, Limited range of motion of the hip joint, Pain that worsens with activity and improves with rest.
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease usually involves just one hip. Both hips are affected in some children, usually at different times.
Make an appointment with your doctor if your child begins limping or complains of hip, groin or knee pain. If your child has a fever or can't bear weight on the leg, seek emergency medical care.
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease occurs when too little blood is supplied to the ball portion of the hip joint (femoral head). Without enough blood, this bone becomes weak and fractures easily. The cause of the temporary reduction in blood flow to the femoral head remains unknown.
Risk factors for Legg-Calve-Perthes disease include:
Age. Although Legg-Calve-Perthes disease can affect children of nearly any age, it most commonly begins between ages 4 and 10.
Your child's sex. Legg-Calve-Perthes is about four times more common in boys than in girls.
Race. White children are more likely to develop the disorder than are black children.
Genetic mutations. For a small number of people, Legg-Calve-Perthes disease appears to be linked to mutations in certain genes, but more study is needed.
Children who have had Legg-Calve-Perthes disease are at higher risk of developing hip arthritis in adulthood — particularly if the hip joint heals in an abnormal shape. If the hipbones don't fit together well after healing, the joint can wear out early.
In general, children who are diagnosed with Legg-Calve-Perthes after age 6 are more likely to develop hip problems later in life. The younger the child is at the time of diagnosis, the better the chances for the hip joint to heal in a normal, round shape.
Legionnaires' disease usually develops two to 10 days after exposure to legionella bacteria. It frequently begins with the following signs and symptoms: Headache, Muscle aches, Fever that may be 104 F (40 C) or higher.
By the second or third day, you'll develop other signs and symptoms that can include: Cough, which might bring up mucus and sometimes blood, Shortness of breath, Chest pain, Gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting and diarrhea, Confusion or other mental changes.
Although Legionnaires' disease primarily affects the lungs, it occasionally can cause infections in wounds and in other parts of the body, including the heart.
A mild form of Legionnaires' disease — known as Pontiac fever — can produce fever, chills, headache and muscle aches. Pontiac fever doesn't infect your lungs, and symptoms usually clear within two to five days.
See your doctor if you think you've been exposed to legionella bacteria. Diagnosing and treating Legionnaires' disease as soon as possible can help shorten the recovery period and prevent serious complications. For people at high risk, such as smokers or older adults, prompt treatment is critical.
The bacterium Legionella pneumophila is responsible for most cases of Legionnaires' disease. Outdoors, legionella bacteria survive in soil and water, but rarely cause infections. However, legionella bacteria can multiply in water systems made by humans, such as air conditioners.
Although it's possible to get Legionnaires' disease from home plumbing, most outbreaks have occurred in large buildings, perhaps because complex systems allow the bacteria to grow and spread more easily. Also, home and car air conditioning units don't use water for cooling.
Most people become infected when they inhale microscopic water droplets containing legionella bacteria. This might be from the spray from a shower, faucet or whirlpool, or water from the ventilation system in a large building. Outbreaks have been linked to: Hot tubs and whirlpools, Cooling towers in air conditioning systems, Hot water tanks and heaters, Decorative fountains, Swimming pools, Birthing pools, Drinking water.
Besides by breathing in water droplets, the infection can be transmitted in other ways, including:
Aspiration. This occurs when liquids accidentally enter your lungs, usually because you cough or choke while drinking. If you aspirate water containing legionella bacteria, you can develop Legionnaires' disease.
Soil. A few people have contracted Legionnaires' disease after working in a garden or using contaminated potting soil.
Not everyone exposed to legionella bacteria becomes sick. You're more likely to develop the infection if you:
Smoke. Smoking damages the lungs, making you more susceptible to all types of lung infections.
Have a weakened immune system. This can be a result of HIV/AIDS or certain medications, especially corticosteroids and drugs taken to prevent organ rejection after a transplant.
Have a chronic lung disease or other serious condition. This includes emphysema, diabetes, kidney disease or cancer.
Are 50 years of age or older.
Legionnaires' disease can be a problem in hospitals and nursing homes, where germs can spread easily and people are vulnerable to infection.
Legionnaires' disease can lead to a number of life-threatening complications, including:
Respiratory failure. This occurs when the lungs can't provide the body with enough oxygen or can't remove enough carbon dioxide from the blood.
Septic shock. This occurs when a severe, sudden drop in blood pressure reduces blood flow to vital organs, especially to the kidneys and brain. The heart tries to compensate by increasing the volume of blood pumped, but the extra workload eventually weakens the heart and reduces blood flow even further.
Acute kidney failure. This is the sudden loss of your kidneys' ability to filter waste from your blood. When your kidneys fail, dangerous levels of fluid and waste accumulate in your body.
When not treated promptly, Legionnaires' disease can be fatal.
Leukemia symptoms vary, depending on the type of leukemia. Common leukemia signs and symptoms include: Fever or chills, Persistent fatigue, weakness, Frequent or severe infections, Losing weight without trying, Swollen lymph nodes, enlarged liver or spleen, Easy bleeding or bruising, Recurrent nosebleeds, Tiny red spots in your skin (petechiae), Excessive sweating, especially at night, Bone pain or tenderness.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
Leukemia symptoms are often vague and not specific. You may overlook early leukemia symptoms because they may resemble symptoms of the flu and other common illnesses.
Rarely, leukemia may be discovered during blood tests for some other condition.
Scientists don't understand the exact causes of leukemia. It seems to develop from a combination of genetic and environmental factors.
In general, leukemia is thought to occur when some blood cells acquire mutations in their DNA — the instructions inside each cell that guide its action. There may be other changes in the cells that have yet to be fully understood that could contribute to leukemia.
Certain abnormalities cause the cell to grow and divide more rapidly and to continue living when normal cells would die. Over time, these abnormal cells can crowd out healthy blood cells in the bone marrow, leading to fewer healthy white blood cells, red blood cells and platelets, causing the signs and symptoms of leukemia.
Doctors classify leukemia based on its speed of progression and the type of cells involved.
The first type of classification is by how fast the leukemia progresses:
Acute leukemia. In acute leukemia, the abnormal blood cells are immature blood cells (blasts). They can't carry out their normal functions, and they multiply rapidly, so the disease worsens quickly. Acute leukemia requires aggressive, timely treatment.
Chronic leukemia. There are many types of chronic leukemias. Some produce too many cells and some cause too few cells to be produced. Chronic leukemia involves more mature blood cells. These blood cells replicate or accumulate more slowly and can function normally for a period of time. Some forms of chronic leukemia initially produce no early symptoms and can go unnoticed or undiagnosed for years.
The second type of classification is by type of white blood cell affected:
Lymphocytic leukemia. This type of leukemia affects the lymphoid cells (lymphocytes), which form lymphoid or lymphatic tissue. Lymphatic tissue makes up your immune system.
Myelogenous (my-uh-LOHJ-uh-nus) leukemia. This type of leukemia affects the myeloid cells. Myeloid cells give rise to red blood cells, white blood cells and platelet-producing cells.
The major types of leukemia are:
Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). This is the most common type of leukemia in young children. ALL can also occur in adults.
Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). AML is a common type of leukemia. It occurs in children and adults. AML is the most common type of acute leukemia in adults.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). With CLL, the most common chronic adult leukemia, you may feel well for years without needing treatment.
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). This type of leukemia mainly affects adults. A person with CML may have few or no symptoms for months or years before entering a phase in which the leukemia cells grow more quickly.
Other types. Other, rarer types of leukemia exist, including hairy cell leukemia, myelodysplastic syndromes and myeloproliferative disorders.
Factors that may increase your risk of developing some types of leukemia include:
Previous cancer treatment. People who've had certain types of chemotherapy and radiation therapy for other cancers have an increased risk of developing certain types of leukemia.
Genetic disorders. Genetic abnormalities seem to play a role in the development of leukemia. Certain genetic disorders, such as Down syndrome, are associated with an increased risk of leukemia.
Exposure to certain chemicals. Exposure to certain chemicals, such as benzene — which is found in gasoline and is used by the chemical industry — is linked to an increased risk of some kinds of leukemia.
Smoking. Smoking cigarettes increases the risk of acute myelogenous leukemia.
Family history of leukemia. If members of your family have been diagnosed with leukemia, your risk of the disease may be increased.
However, most people with known risk factors don't get leukemia. And many people with leukemia have none of these risk factors.
Leukoplakia usually occurs on your gums, the insides of your cheeks, the bottom of your mouth — beneath the tongue — and, sometimes, your tongue. It isn't usually painful and may go unnoticed for a while.
Leukoplakia may appear: White or grayish in patches that can't be wiped away, Irregular or flat-textured, Thickened or hardened in areas, Along with raised, red lesions (speckled leukoplakia or erythroplakia), which are more likely to show precancerous changes.
Hairy leukoplakia causes fuzzy, white patches that resemble folds or ridges, usually on the sides of your tongue. It's often mistaken for oral thrush, an infection marked by creamy white patches that can be wiped away, which is also common in people with a weakened immune system.
Even though leukoplakia doesn't usually cause discomfort, sometimes it can indicate a more serious condition.
See your dentist or primary care professional if you have any of the following: White plaques or sores in your mouth that don't heal on their own within two weeks, Lumps or white, red or dark patches in your mouth, Persistent changes in the tissues of your mouth, Ear pain when swallowing, Progressive reduction in the ability to open your jaw.
Although the cause of leukoplakia is unknown, chronic irritation, such as from tobacco use, including smoking and chewing, appears to be responsible for most cases. Often, regular users of smokeless tobacco products eventually develop leukoplakia where they hold the tobacco against their cheeks.
Other causes may include chronic irritation from: Jagged, broken or sharp teeth rubbing on tongue surfaces, Broken or ill-fitting dentures, Long-term alcohol use.
Your dentist can talk with you about what may be causing leukoplakia in your case.
Hairy leukoplakia results from infection with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Once you've been infected with EBV, the virus remains in your body for life. Normally, the virus is dormant, but if your immune system is weakened, especially from HIV/AIDS, the virus can become reactivated, leading to conditions such as hairy leukoplakia.
Tobacco use, particularly smokeless tobacco, puts you at high risk of leukoplakia and oral cancer. Long-term alcohol use increases your risk, and drinking alcohol combined with smoking increases your risk even more.
People with HIV/AIDS are especially likely to develop hairy leukoplakia. Although the use of antiretroviral drugs has reduced the number of cases, hairy leukoplakia still affects a number of HIV-positive people, and it may be one of the first signs of HIV infection.
Leukoplakia usually doesn't cause permanent damage to tissues in your mouth. However, leukoplakia increases your risk of oral cancer. Oral cancers often form near leukoplakia patches, and the patches themselves may show cancerous changes. Even after leukoplakia patches are removed, the risk of oral cancer remains.
Hairy leukoplakia isn't likely to lead to cancer. But it may indicate HIV/AIDS.
Lewy body dementia signs and symptoms may include:
Visual hallucinations. Hallucinations may be one of the first symptoms, and they often recur. They may include seeing shapes, animals or people that aren't there. Sound (auditory), smell (olfactory) or touch (tactile) hallucinations are possible.
Movement disorders. Signs of Parkinson's disease (parkinsonian signs), such as slowed movement, rigid muscles, tremor or a shuffling walk may occur. This can also result in falls.
Poor regulation of body functions (autonomic nervous system). Blood pressure, pulse, sweating and the digestive process are regulated by a part of the nervous system that is often affected by Lewy body dementia. This can result in dizziness, falls and bowel issues such as constipation.
Cognitive problems. You may experience thinking (cognitive) problems similar to those of Alzheimer's disease, such as confusion, poor attention, visual-spatial problems and memory loss.
Sleep difficulties. You may have rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder, which can cause you to physically act out your dreams while you're asleep.
Fluctuating attention. Episodes of drowsiness, long periods of staring into space, long naps during the day or disorganized speech are possible.
Depression. You may experience depression sometime during the course of your illness.
Apathy. You may have loss of motivation.
Lewy body dementia is characterized by the abnormal buildup of proteins into masses known as Lewy bodies. This protein is also associated with Parkinson's disease. People who have Lewy bodies in their brains also have the plaques and tangles associated with Alzheimer's disease.
A few factors seem to increase the risk of developing Lewy body dementia, including:
Age. People older than 60 are at greater risk.
Sex. Lewy body dementia affects more men than women.
Family history. Those who have a family member with Lewy body dementia or Parkinson's disease are at greater risk.
Lewy body dementia is progressive. Signs and symptoms worsen, causing: Severe dementia, Aggressive behavior, Depression, Increased risk of falling and injury, Worsening of parkinsonian signs and symptoms, such as tremors, Death, on average about eight years after symptoms start.
Common signs and symptoms of lice include:
Intense itching on the scalp, body or in the genital area.
Tickling feeling from movement of hair.
Lice on your scalp, body, clothing, or pubic or other body hair. Adult lice may be about the size of a sesame seed or slightly larger.
Lice eggs (nits) on hair shafts. Nits may be difficult to see because they're very tiny. They're easiest to spot around the ears and the nape of the neck. Nits can be mistaken for dandruff, but unlike dandruff, they can't be easily brushed out of hair.
Sores on the scalp, neck and shoulders. Scratching can lead to small red bumps that can sometimes get infected with bacteria.
Bite marks especially around the waist, groin, upper thighs and pubic area.
See your doctor if you suspect a lice infestation. Things often mistaken for nits include: Dandruff, Residue from hair products, Bead of dead hair tissue on a hair shaft (hair cast), Scabs, dirt or other debris, Other small insects found in the hair.
Lice feed on human blood and can infest the human head, body and pubic area. The female louse produces a sticky substance that firmly attaches each egg to the base of a hair shaft. Eggs hatch in six to nine days.
You can get lice by coming into contact with either lice or their eggs. Lice can't jump or fly. They spread through:
Head-to-head or body-to-body contact. This may occur as children or family members play or interact closely.
Proximity of stored belongings. Storing infested clothing in closets, lockers or on side-by-side hooks at school, or storing personal items such as pillows, blankets, combs and stuffed toys in proximity at home can permit lice to spread.
Items shared among friends or family members. These may include clothing, headphones, brushes, combs, hair decorations, towels, blankets, pillows and stuffed toys.
Contact with contaminated furniture. Lying on a bed or sitting in overstuffed, cloth-covered furniture recently used by someone with lice can spread them. Lice can live for one to two days off the body.
Sexual contact. Pubic lice usually spread through sexual contact and most commonly affect adults. Pubic lice found on children may be a sign of sexual exposure or abuse.
Lichen nitidus appears as clusters of tiny, glistening bumps (papules). Characteristics of the bumps include the following:
Size. The bumps range in size from pinpoint to pinhead size.
Shape. They are flat topped and round.
Color. Bumps are usually the same color as your skin. They may be slightly pink on people with lighter skin, or lighter than normal skin color on people with darker skin.
Location. Lichen nitidus bumps commonly occur on the chest, abdomen, arms and genital areas, including the penis. They rarely occur on the palms, soles of the feet or fingernails. Lichen nitidus may clear up at one site on your body but then appear at another.
Itch. In rare cases, the bumps of lichen nitidus may itch, sometimes intensely. They may appear in a line where there's a scratch, crease or constant pressure on the skin, such as a fold of skin on the abdomen or the crease of skin on the inside of the elbow or wrist.
See your doctor if tiny bumps or a rash-like condition appears on your skin for no apparent reason, such as a known allergic reaction or contact with poison ivy. Because a number of conditions can cause skin reactions, it's best to get a prompt and accurate diagnosis.
Get immediate care if your skin condition is accompanied by other signs and symptoms, such as: Fever, Itching, Pus or oozing from a rash.
The cause of lichen nitidus is unknown. The papules that appear are the result of inflammation controlled by white blood cells called T lymphocytes. Normally, these cells work to heal disease or injury, such as a cut on your finger. Doctors and researchers don't know what prompts T lymphocytes to be activated in lichen nitidus.
Lichen nitidus seems to be more likely to develop in children and young adults.
Because lichen nitidus is rare, most information about the disorder is known from individual cases or small studies. Links between lichen nitidus and other diseases aren't well-understood, but they may include: Lichen planus, an inflammatory condition usually characterized by patches of red or purple, flat-topped, itchy bumps on the skin or lacy white patches on the mucous membranes of the mouth, Atopic dermatitis (eczema), an inflammatory skin condition usually characterized by dry, itchy rashes on the face, inside the elbow, behind the knees, and on the hands and feet, Crohn's disease, inflammation of the lining of your digestive tract, which can lead to abdominal pain, severe diarrhea and malnutrition, Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, an inflammatory disease that causes persistent joint pain, swelling and stiffness, Tuberculosis, an infectious disease that most often affects the lungs.
Lichen nitidus is a harmless condition that doesn't result in long-term skin problems or medical complications. However, the appearance of lichen nitidus may cause a person to be self-conscious or embarrassed.
The signs and symptoms of lichen planus vary depending on the areas affected. Typical signs and symptoms are: Purplish, flat bumps, most often on the inner forearm, wrist or ankle, and sometimes the genitals, Itching, Blisters that break to form scabs or crusts, Lacy white patches in the mouth or on the lips or tongue, Painful sores in the mouth or vagina, Hair loss, Change in scalp color, Nail damage or loss.
See your doctor if tiny bumps or a rash-like condition appears on your skin for no apparent reason, such as a known allergic reaction or contact with poison ivy. Also see your doctor if you experience any signs or symptoms associated with lichen planus of the mouth, genitals, scalp or nails.
It's best to get a prompt and accurate diagnosis because a number of skin and mucosal conditions can cause lesions and discomfort.
Lichen planus occurs when your immune system attacks cells of the skin or mucous membranes. It's not clear why this abnormal immune response happens. The condition isn't contagious.
Lichen planus can be triggered by: Hepatitis C infection, Flu vaccine, Certain pigments, chemicals and metals, Pain relievers, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen (Aleve, others), Certain medications for heart disease, high blood pressure or arthritis.
Anyone can develop lichen planus. But the condition most often affects middle-aged adults. Oral lichen planus most often affects middle-aged women.
Lichen planus can be difficult to manage on the vulva and in the vagina, causing severe pain and sometimes leaving scars. Sexual dysfunction can become a long-term complication. Oral sores may affect your ability to eat. The affected skin might stay slightly darker even after the rash clears up, especially in dark-skinned people.
Oral lichen planus increases the risk of oral cancer. Left untreated, lichen planus of the ear canal may lead to hearing loss.
People with mild lichen sclerosus may have no signs or symptoms.
Signs and symptoms usually affect the skin of the genital and anal areas, but may also affect the skin of the upper body, upper arms and breasts. They may include: Redness, Itching (pruritus), which can be severe, Discomfort or pain, Smooth white patches on your skin, Blotchy, wrinkled patches, Tearing or bleeding, In severe cases, bleeding, blistering or ulcerated sores, Painful sex.
See your doctor if you have signs and symptoms common to lichen sclerosus.
If you've already been diagnosed with lichen sclerosus, see your doctor every six to 12 months to be checked for any skin changes or treatment side effects.
The cause of lichen sclerosus is unknown. An overactive immune system or an imbalance of hormones may play a role. Previous skin damage at a particular site on your skin may increase the likelihood of lichen sclerosus at that location.
Lichen sclerosus isn't contagious and cannot be spread through sexual intercourse.
Lichen sclerosus often occurs in postmenopausal women, but also in men and children. In women, lichen sclerosus usually involves the vulva. In boys and men, uncircumcised males are most at risk, because the condition generally affects the foreskin.
In children, the signs and symptoms may improve at puberty, but they will still need monitoring for disease activity.
The risk of lichen sclerosus is higher for postmenopausal women, although it can occur in men and children. Men who are uncircumcised have a higher risk because the condition often affects the foreskin.
Complications of lichen sclerosus include painful sex, urinary retention, constipation and an inability to retract the foreskin. People with lichen sclerosus are also at an increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the affected area.
While some varieties of scleroderma occur rapidly, signs and symptoms of limited scleroderma usually develop gradually. They include:
Tight, hardened skin. In limited scleroderma, skin changes typically affect only the lower arms and legs, including fingers and toes, and sometimes the face and neck. Skin can look shiny from being pulled taut over underlying bone. It may become difficult to bend your fingers or to open your mouth.
Raynaud's phenomena. This condition occurs when small blood vessels in your fingers and toes spasm in response to cold or emotional stress, blocking the flow of blood. In most people, the skin turns white before becoming blue, cold and numb.
When circulation improves, the skin usually reddens and might throb or tingle. Raynaud's phenomena is often the first sign of limited scleroderma, but many people who have Raynaud's never develop scleroderma.
Red spots or lines on skin. The swelling of tiny blood vessels near the skin's surface cause these small red spots or lines (telangiectasias). Not painful, they occur primarily on the hands and face.
Bumps under the skin. Limited scleroderma can cause tiny calcium deposits (calcinosis) to develop under your skin, mainly on your elbows, knees and fingers. You can see and feel these deposits, which sometimes are tender or become infected.
Swallowing difficulties. Limited scleroderma commonly causes problems with the tube that connects the mouth and stomach (esophagus). Poor functioning of the muscles in the upper and lower esophagus can make swallowing difficult and allow stomach acids to back up into the esophagus, leading to heartburn, inflammation and scarring of esophageal tissues.
Early detection of limited scleroderma can help prevent serious complications. See your doctor if you have any indications of the condition.
The cause isn't known, but limited scleroderma is believed to be an autoimmune disorder, in which your immune system turns against your body. The immune system appears to stimulate the production of too much collagen, a key component of connective tissue. This overproduction of collagen builds up in the skin and internal organs so that they don't function normally.
Your sex. Women are far more likely to develop limited scleroderma than men are.
Age. Limited scleroderma is more common between the ages of 30 and 50.
Race. In the United States, limited scleroderma tends to be more severe in blacks and Native Americans than in whites.
Genetic factors. If someone in your family has an autoimmune disease — such as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis or Hashimoto's disease — you have an increased risk of developing limited scleroderma.
Exposure to toxins. Certain toxic substances — such as polyvinyl chloride, benzene, silica and trichloroethylene — might trigger scleroderma in people with a genetic predisposition to the disease.
The visible signs of limited scleroderma — tight, thick skin on your fingers, hands and face — can change your appearance; make everyday tasks, such as opening a jar or shaving, more difficult; and affect your speech. But the most serious complications tend to occur beneath your skin.
Gastrointestinal problems. Changes in the functioning of esophageal muscles can cause difficulty swallowing and chronic heartburn. When limited scleroderma affects your intestine, it can cause constipation, diarrhea, bloating after meals, unintended weight loss and malnutrition.
Ulcers on fingers and toes. Severe Raynaud's phenomena can obstruct blood flow to your fingers and toes, causing ulcers that can be difficult to heal. Also, abnormal or narrowed blood vessels combined with severe Raynaud's phenomena can lead to gangrene of fingers or toes, which might require amputation.
Lung damage. Limited scleroderma can cause a variety of problems with your lungs. In some cases, excess collagen collects in the tissue between the lungs' air sacs, making the lung tissue stiffer and less able to work properly.
Increased blood pressure in the arteries between your heart and lungs makes the heart work harder and eventually weakens it.
Heart problems. Scarring of heart tissue can lead to abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias) and, in rare cases, to an inflamed heart muscle (myocarditis).
Kidney problems. Although kidney damage is more common in other forms of scleroderma, it can occur in limited scleroderma. The first indication might be high blood pressure. Restricted blood flow to the kidneys can result in renal crises, which, if untreated, can lead to kidney failure.
Dental problems. Severe tightening of facial skin can make it difficult to open your mouth wide enough to brush your teeth. Acid reflux can destroy tooth enamel, and changes in gum tissue may cause your teeth to become loose or even fall out.
Dry eyes and mouth. Limited scleroderma can cause very dry eyes and mouth.
Signs and symptoms of lip cancer include: A flat or slightly raised whitish discoloration of the lip, A sore on your lip that won't heal, Tingling, pain or numbness of the lips or the skin around the mouth.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes lip cancer.
In general, cancer starts when cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the cell to begin multiplying uncontrollably and to continue living when healthy cells would die. The accumulating cells form a tumor that can invade and destroy normal body tissue.
Factors that can increase your risk of lip cancer include: Tobacco use of any kind, including cigarettes, cigars, pipes, chewing tobacco and snuff, among others, Fair skin, Excessive sun exposure to your lips, A weakened immune system.
Lipomas can occur anywhere in the body. They are typically:
Situated just under the skin. They commonly occur in the neck, shoulders, back, abdomen, arms and thighs.
Soft and doughy to the touch. They also move easily with slight finger pressure.
Generally small. Lipomas are typically less than 2 inches (5 centimeters) in diameter, but they can grow.
Sometimes painful. Lipomas can be painful if they grow and press on nearby nerves or if they contain many blood vessels.
A lipoma is rarely a serious medical condition. But if you notice a lump or swelling anywhere on your body, have it checked by your doctor.
The cause of lipomas isn't fully understood. They tend to run in families, so genetic factors likely play a role in their development.
Several factors may increase your risk of developing a lipoma, including:
Being between 40 and 60 years old. Although lipomas can occur at any age, they're most common in this age group.
Genetics. Lipomas tend to run in families.
Liposarcoma signs and symptoms vary depending on the part of the body where the cancer forms.
Liposarcoma that forms in the arms and legs can cause: A growing lump of tissue under your skin, Pain, Swelling, Weakness of the affected limb.
Liposarcoma that forms in the abdomen can cause: Abdominal pain, Abdominal swelling, Feeling full sooner when eating, Constipation, Blood in stool.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes liposarcoma.
Doctors know that liposarcoma forms when a fat cell develops errors (mutations) in its genetic code. The mutations tell the cell to multiply rapidly and to go on living when other cells would die. The accumulating abnormal cells form a mass (tumor).
Several types of liposarcoma exist. Some grow slowly and the cells stay in one area of the body. Other types grow very quickly and may spread to other areas of the body.
If you develop a listeria infection, you might have: Fever, Chills, Muscle aches, Nausea, Diarrhea.
Symptoms might begin a few days after you've eaten contaminated food, but it can take 30 days or more before the first signs and symptoms of infection begin.
If the listeria infection spreads to your nervous system, signs and symptoms can include: Headache, Stiff neck, Confusion or changes in alertness, Loss of balance, Convulsions.
During pregnancy, a listeria infection is likely to cause only mild signs and symptoms in the mother. The consequences for the baby, however, can be devastating — the baby can die in the womb or have a life-threatening infection within a few days of being born.
Signs and symptoms of a listeria infection in a newborn can be subtle, but can include: Little interest in feeding, Irritability, Fever, Vomiting, Difficulty breathing.
If you've eaten a food that's been recalled because of a listeria outbreak, watch for signs or symptoms of illness. If you have a fever, muscle aches, nausea or diarrhea, contact your doctor. The same goes for illness after eating a potentially contaminated product, such as foods made with unpasteurized milk or poorly heated hot dogs or deli meats.
If you have a high fever, severe headache, stiff neck, confusion or sensitivity to light, seek emergency care. These signs and symptoms can indicate bacterial meningitis, a life-threatening complication of a listeria infection.
Listeria bacteria can be found in soil, water and animal feces. People can get infected by eating the following: Raw vegetables that have been contaminated from the soil or from contaminated manure used as fertilizer, Contaminated meat, Unpasteurized milk or foods made with unpasteurized milk, Certain processed foods — such as soft cheeses, hot dogs and deli meats that have been contaminated after processing.
Unborn babies can contract a listeria infection from the mother.
Pregnant women and people who have weak immune systems are at highest risk of contracting a listeria infection.
Pregnant women are much more susceptible to listeria infections than are other healthy adults. Although a listeria infection might cause only a mild illness in pregnant women, consequences for their babies can include: Miscarriage, Stillbirth, Premature birth, A potentially fatal infection after birth.
This category includes people who: Are older than 65, Have AIDS, Are receiving chemotherapy, Have diabetes or kidney disease, Take high-dose prednisone or certain rheumatoid arthritis drugs, Take medications to block rejection of a transplanted organ.
Most listeria infections are so mild they can go unnoticed. However, in some cases, a listeria infection can lead to life-threatening complications, including: Generalized blood infection, Inflammation of the membranes and fluid surrounding the brain (meningitis).
Most people don't have signs and symptoms in the early stages of primary liver cancer. When signs and symptoms do appear, they may include: Losing weight without trying, Loss of appetite, Upper abdominal pain, Nausea and vomiting, General weakness and fatigue, Abdominal swelling, Yellow discoloration of your skin and the whites of your eyes (jaundice), White, chalky stools.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you experience any signs or symptoms that worry you.
Liver cancer happens when liver cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA is the material that provides instructions for every chemical process in your body. DNA mutations cause changes in these instructions. One result is that cells may begin to grow out of control and eventually form a tumor — a mass of cancerous cells.
Sometimes the cause of liver cancer is known, such as with chronic hepatitis infections. But sometimes liver cancer happens in people with no underlying diseases and it's not clear what causes it.
Factors that increase the risk of primary liver cancer include:
Chronic infection with HBV or HCV. Chronic infection with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV) increases your risk of liver cancer.
Cirrhosis. This progressive and irreversible condition causes scar tissue to form in your liver and increases your chances of developing liver cancer.
Certain inherited liver diseases. Liver diseases that can increase the risk of liver cancer include hemochromatosis and Wilson's disease.
Diabetes. People with this blood sugar disorder have a greater risk of liver cancer than those who don't have diabetes.
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. An accumulation of fat in the liver increases the risk of liver cancer.
Exposure to aflatoxins. Aflatoxins are poisons produced by molds that grow on crops that are stored poorly. Crops, such as grains and nuts, can become contaminated with aflatoxins, which can end up in foods made of these products.
Excessive alcohol consumption. Consuming more than a moderate amount of alcohol daily over many years can lead to irreversible liver damage and increase your risk of liver cancer.
Liver disease doesn't always cause noticeable signs and symptoms. If signs and symptoms of liver disease do occur, the may include: Skin and eyes that appear yellowish (jaundice), Abdominal pain and swelling, Swelling in the legs and ankles, Itchy skin, Dark urine color, Pale stool color, Chronic fatigue, Nausea or vomiting, Loss of appetite, Tendency to bruise easily.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you. Seek immediate medical attention if you have abdominal pain that is so severe that you can't stay still.
Liver disease has many causes.
Parasites and viruses can infect the liver, causing inflammation that reduces liver function. The viruses that cause liver damage can be spread through blood or semen, contaminated food or water, or close contact with a person who is infected. The most common types of liver infection are hepatitis viruses, including: Hepatitis A, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C.
Diseases in which your immune system attacks certain parts of your body (autoimmune) can affect your liver. Examples of autoimmune liver diseases include: Autoimmune hepatitis, Primary biliary cholangitis, Primary sclerosing cholangitis.
An abnormal gene inherited from one or both of your parents can cause various substances to build up in your liver, resulting in liver damage. Genetic liver diseases include: Hemochromatosis, Wilson's disease, Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
Examples include: Liver cancer, Bile duct cancer, Liver adenoma.
Additional, common causes of liver disease include: Chronic alcohol abuse, Fat accumulation in the liver (nonalcoholic fatty liver disease), Certain prescription or over-the-counter medications, Certain herbal compounds.
Factors that may increase your risk of liver disease include: Heavy alcohol use, Obesity, Type 2 diabetes, Tattoos or body piercings, Injecting drugs using shared needles, Blood transfusion before 1992, Exposure to other people's blood and body fluids, Unprotected sex, Exposure to certain chemicals or toxins, Family history of liver disease.
Complications of liver disease vary, depending on the cause of your liver problems. Untreated liver disease may progress to liver failure, a life-threatening condition.
In most cases, a liver hemangioma doesn't cause any signs or symptoms.
When a liver hemangioma causes signs and symptoms, they may include: Pain in the upper right abdomen, Feeling full after eating only a small amount of food, Nausea, Vomiting.
However, these symptoms are nonspecific and may be due to something else, even if you have a liver hemangioma.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you experience any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes a liver hemangioma to form. Doctors believe liver hemangiomas are congenital — meaning that you're born with them.
A liver hemangioma usually occurs as a single abnormal collection of blood vessels that is less than about 1.5 inches (about 4 centimeters) wide. Occasionally liver hemangiomas can be larger or occur in multiples. Large hemangiomas can occur in young children but this is very rare.
In most people, a liver hemangioma will never grow and never cause any signs and symptoms. But in a small number of people, a liver hemangioma will grow to cause complications and require treatment. It's not clear why this happens.
Factors that can increase the risk that a liver hemangioma will cause signs and symptoms include:
Your age. A liver hemangioma can be diagnosed at any age, but it's most commonly diagnosed in people ages 30 to 50.
Your sex. Women are more likely to be diagnosed with a liver hemangioma than are men.
Pregnancy. Women who have been pregnant are more likely to be diagnosed with a liver hemangioma than women who have never been pregnant. It's believed the hormone estrogen, which rises during pregnancy, may play a role in liver hemangioma growth.
Hormone replacement therapy. Women who used hormone replacement therapy for menopausal symptoms may be more likely to be diagnosed with a liver hemangioma than women who did not.
Women who have been diagnosed with liver hemangiomas face a risk of complications if they become pregnant. The female hormone estrogen, which increases during pregnancy, is believed to cause some liver hemangiomas to grow larger.
Rarely, growing hemangioma can cause signs and symptoms that may require treatment, including pain in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen, abdominal bloating or nausea. Having a liver hemangioma doesn't mean you can't become pregnant. However, discussing the possible complications with your doctor can help you make a more informed choice.
Medications that affect hormone levels in your body, such as birth control pills, could cause complications if you've been diagnosed with a liver hemangioma. But this is controversial. If you're considering this type of medication, discuss the benefits and risks with your doctor.
LCIS doesn't cause signs or symptoms. Rather, your doctor might discover incidentally that you have LCIS — for instance, after a biopsy to assess a breast lump or an abnormal area found on a mammogram.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice a change in your breasts, such as a lump, an area of puckered or otherwise unusual skin, a thickened region under the skin, or nipple discharge.
Ask your doctor when you should consider breast cancer screening and how often it should be repeated. Most groups recommend considering routine breast cancer screening beginning in your 40s. Talk with your doctor about what's right for you.
It's not clear what causes LCIS. LCIS begins when cells in a milk-producing gland (lobule) of a breast develop genetic mutations that cause the cells to appear abnormal. The abnormal cells remain in the lobule and don't extend into, or invade, nearby breast tissue.
If LCIS is detected in a breast biopsy, it doesn't mean that you have cancer. But having LCIS increases your risk of breast cancer and makes it more likely that you may develop invasive breast cancer.
The risk of breast cancer in women diagnosed with LCIS is thought to be approximately 20 percent. Put another way, for every 100 women diagnosed with LCIS, 20 will be diagnosed with breast cancer and 80 won't be diagnosed with breast cancer. The risk of developing breast cancer for women in general is thought to be 12 percent. Put another way, for every 100 women in the general population, 12 will be diagnosed with breast cancer.
Your individual risk of breast cancer is based on many factors. Talk to your doctor to better understand your personal risk of breast cancer.
Many people who have long QT syndrome don't have any signs or symptoms. You might be aware of your condition only because of: Results of an electrocardiogram (ECG) done for an unrelated reason, A family history of long QT syndrome, Genetic testing results.
Fainting is the most common sign of long QT syndrome.
Fainting (syncope) occurs when the heart temporarily beats in an unorganized way. You might faint when you're excited, angry or scared or during exercise. Things that startle you — for example, a telephone or an alarm clock — can cause you to lose consciousness. A fainting spell from long QT syndrome can occur with little to no warning. Some people have a warning sign first, such as lightheadedness, heart palpitations, weakness or blurred vision.
Seizures also may occur in some people with LQTS.
Generally, the heart returns to its normal rhythm. If this doesn't happen by itself, or if an external defibrillator isn't used in time to set your heartbeat back to normal, sudden death will occur.
Most people with symptoms of long QT syndrome have their first episode by age 40. However, congenital long QT syndrome signs and symptoms can occur in babies during the first weeks to months after birth, or in childhood or later. Some people with congenital long QT syndrome never have signs or symptoms.
Signs and symptoms of long QT syndrome might occur during sleep.
Call your doctor if you suddenly faint during physical activity or emotional excitement or after taking any new medication. If you have a first-degree relative (parent, sibling or child) with long QT syndrome, it's important to let your doctor know. Long QT syndrome can run in families.
Long QT syndrome is a heart rhythm disorder caused by abnormalities in the heart's electrical recharging system. The heart's structure is normal.
Normally, the heart sends blood out to the body during each heartbeat. The heart's chambers contract and relax to pump the blood. This coordinated action is controlled by your heart's electrical system. Electrical signals (impulses) travel from the top to the bottom of your heart and trigger it to contract and beat. After each heartbeat, the system recharges itself to prepare for the next heartbeat.
In long QT syndrome, your heart's electrical system takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. This delay, which often can be seen on an electrocardiogram (ECG), is called a prolonged QT interval.
Long QT syndrome is often grouped into two main categories, depending on the cause.
If you are born with the condition, it's called congenital long QT syndrome. Some forms of long QT syndrome result from a genetic mutation that is passed down through families (inherited).
If an underlying medical condition or medication causes it, it's called acquired long QT syndrome. This type of long QT syndrome is usually reversible when the underlying cause is identified.
More than 17 genes have been linked to long QT syndrome so far, and researchers have identified hundreds of mutations within these genes.
Doctors have described two forms of congenital long QT syndrome:
Romano-Ward syndrome (autosomal dominant form). This more common form occurs in people who inherit only a single gene variant from one parent.
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (autosomal recessive form). This rare form usually occurs earlier and is more severe. In this syndrome, children receive the faulty gene variants from both parents. The children are born with long QT syndrome and deafness.
More than 100 medications — many of them common — can lengthen the QT interval in otherwise healthy people and cause acquired long QT syndrome.
Medications that can cause acquired long QT syndrome include: Certain common antibiotics, such as erythromycin (Eryc, Erythrocin, others), azithromycin (Zithromax, Zmax) and others, Certain antifungal medications taken by mouth used to treat yeast infections, Diuretics that cause an electrolyte imbalance (low potassium, most commonly), Heart rhythm drugs (especially anti-arrhythmic medications that lengthen the QT interval), Certain antidepressant and antipsychotic medications, Some anti-nausea medications.
If your condition is caused by a medication, it may be called drug-induced long QT syndrome. Always tell your doctor about all the medications you take, including those you buy without a prescription.
Other causes of acquired long QT syndrome include: Low potassium level (hypokalemia), Low calcium level (hypocalcemia), Low magnesium level (hypomagnesemia), COVID-19 infection.
The following things may increase your risk of developing congenital or acquired long QT syndrome or its symptoms: A history of cardiac arrest, Having a first-degree relative (parent, sibling) with long QT syndrome, Using medications known to cause prolonged QT intervals, Being female and on heart medication, Excessive vomiting or diarrhea, Eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa, which cause electrolyte imbalances.
Sexual intercourse doesn't appear to be high risk for patients with long QT syndrome. Pregnancy and delivery aren't associated with an increased risk of symptoms in women diagnosed with long QT syndrome. However, if you have the condition and are pregnant, your doctor will want to carefully monitor you during and after pregnancy.
Proper medical treatment and lifestyle changes can help prevent complications related to long QT syndrome.
Complications of long QT syndrome include:
Torsades de pointes ('twisting of the points'). This is a life-threatening form of ventricular arrhythmia. Your heart's two lower chambers (ventricles) beat fast and chaotically, making the waves on an ECG monitor look twisted. The heart pumps out less blood. The lack of blood to the brain causes you to faint suddenly and, often, without warning.
If the episode lasts for a long time, fainting can be followed by a full-body seizure. If the dangerous rhythm does not correct itself, then a life-threatening arrhythmia called ventricular fibrillation follows.
Ventricular fibrillation. This condition causes the ventricles to beat so fast that your heart quivers and stops pumping blood. Unless your heart is shocked back into a normal rhythm by a defibrillator, ventricular fibrillation can lead to brain damage and sudden death.
Sudden death. It's now known that long QT syndrome might explain some cases of sudden death in young people who otherwise appear healthy.
Unexplained fainting, drownings, seizures or other accident. Long QT syndrome might be responsible for some otherwise unexplained deaths in children and young adults.
For some people, low blood pressure signals an underlying problem, especially when it drops suddenly or is accompanied by signs and symptoms such as: Dizziness or lightheadedness, Fainting, Blurred or fading vision, Nausea, Fatigue, Lack of concentration.
Extreme hypotension can result in this life-threatening condition. Signs and symptoms include: Confusion, especially in older people, Cold, clammy, pale skin, Rapid, shallow breathing, Weak and rapid pulse.
If you have signs or symptoms of shock, seek emergency medical help.
If you have consistently low blood pressure readings but feel fine, your doctor will likely just monitor you during routine exams.
Even occasional dizziness or lightheadedness may be a relatively minor problem — the result of mild dehydration from too much time in the sun or a hot tub, for example. Still, it's important to see your doctor if you have signs or symptoms of low blood pressure because they can point to more-serious problems. It can be helpful to keep a record of your symptoms, when they occur and what you're doing at the time.
Blood pressure is a measurement of the pressure in your arteries during the active and resting phases of each heartbeat.
Systolic pressure. The top number in a blood pressure reading is the amount of pressure your heart produces when pumping blood through your arteries to the rest of your body.
Diastolic pressure. The bottom number in a blood pressure reading refers to the amount of pressure in your arteries when your heart is at rest between beats.
Current guidelines identify normal blood pressure as lower than 120/80 mm Hg.
Blood pressure varies throughout the day, depending on: Body position, Breathing rhythm, Stress level, Physical condition, Medications you take, What you eat and drink, Time of day.
Blood pressure is usually lowest at night and rises sharply on waking.
What's considered low blood pressure for you may be normal for someone else. Most doctors consider blood pressure too low only if it causes symptoms.
Some experts define low blood pressure as readings lower than 90 mm Hg systolic or 60 mm Hg diastolic. If either number is below that, your pressure is lower than normal.
A sudden fall in blood pressure can be dangerous. A change of just 20 mm Hg — a drop from 110 systolic to 90 mm Hg systolic, for example — can cause dizziness and fainting when the brain fails to receive enough blood. And big drops, such as those caused by uncontrolled bleeding, severe infections or allergic reactions, can be life-threatening.
Medical conditions that can cause low blood pressure include:
Pregnancy. Because the circulatory system expands rapidly during pregnancy, blood pressure is likely to drop. This is normal, and blood pressure usually returns to your pre-pregnancy level after you've given birth.
Heart problems. Some heart conditions that can lead to low blood pressure include extremely low heart rate (bradycardia), heart valve problems, heart attack and heart failure.
Endocrine problems. Parathyroid disease, adrenal insufficiency (Addison's disease), low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) and, in some cases, diabetes can trigger low blood pressure.
Dehydration. When your body loses more water than it takes in, it can cause weakness, dizziness and fatigue. Fever, vomiting, severe diarrhea, overuse of diuretics and strenuous exercise can lead to dehydration.
Blood loss. Losing a lot of blood, such as from a major injury or internal bleeding, reduces the amount of blood in your body, leading to a severe drop in blood pressure.
Severe infection (septicemia). When an infection in the body enters the bloodstream, it can lead to a life-threatening drop in blood pressure called septic shock.
Severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis). Common triggers of this severe and potentially life-threatening reaction include foods, certain medications, insect venoms and latex. Anaphylaxis can cause breathing problems, hives, itching, a swollen throat and a dangerous drop in blood pressure.
Lack of nutrients in your diet. A lack of the vitamin B-12, folate and iron can keep your body from producing enough red blood cells (anemia), causing low blood pressure.
Some medications can cause low blood pressure, including: Water pills (diuretics), such as furosemide (Lasix) and hydrochlorothiazide (Microzide, others), Alpha blockers, such as prazosin (Minipress), Beta blockers, such as atenolol (Tenormin) and propranolol (Inderal, Innopran XL, others), Drugs for Parkinson's disease, such as pramipexole (Mirapex) or those containing levodopa, Certain types of antidepressants (tricyclic antidepressants), including doxepin (Silenor) and imipramine (Tofranil), Drugs for erectile dysfunction, including sildenafil (Revatio, Viagra) or tadalafil (Adcirca, Alyq, Cialis), particularly when taken with the heart medication nitroglycerin (Nitrostat, others).
Doctors often break down low blood pressure (hypotension) into categories, depending on the causes and other factors. Some types of low blood pressure include:
Low blood pressure on standing up (orthostatic or postural) hypotension). This is a sudden drop in blood pressure when you stand up from a sitting position or after lying down.
Gravity causes blood to pool in your legs when you stand. Ordinarily, your body compensates by increasing your heart rate and constricting blood vessels, thereby ensuring that enough blood returns to your brain.
But in people with orthostatic hypotension, this compensating mechanism fails and blood pressure falls, leading to dizziness, lightheadedness, blurred vision and even fainting.
Orthostatic hypotension can occur for various reasons, including dehydration, prolonged bed rest, pregnancy, diabetes, heart problems, burns, excessive heat, large varicose veins and certain neurological disorders.
A number of medications also can cause orthostatic hypotension, particularly drugs used to treat high blood pressure — diuretics, beta blockers, calcium channel blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors — as well as antidepressants and drugs used to treat Parkinson's disease and erectile dysfunction.
Orthostatic hypotension is especially common in older adults, but it also affects young, otherwise healthy people who stand up suddenly after sitting with their legs crossed for long periods or after squatting for a time.
Low blood pressure after eating (postprandial hypotension). This drop in blood pressure occurs one to two hours after eating and affects mostly older adults.
Blood flows to your digestive tract after you eat. Ordinarily, your body increases your heart rate and constricts certain blood vessels to help maintain normal blood pressure. But in some people these mechanisms fail, leading to dizziness, faintness and falls.
Postprandial hypotension is more likely to affect people with high blood pressure or autonomic nervous system disorders such as Parkinson's disease.
Eating small, low-carbohydrate meals; drinking more water; and avoiding alcohol might help reduce symptoms.
Low blood pressure from faulty brain signals (neurally mediated hypotension). This disorder, which causes a blood pressure drop after standing for long periods, mostly affects young adults and children. It seems to occur because of a miscommunication between the heart and the brain.
Low blood pressure due to nervous system damage (multiple system atrophy with orthostatic hypotension). Also called Shy-Drager syndrome, this rare disorder has many Parkinson disease-like symptoms. It causes progressive damage to the autonomic nervous system, which controls involuntary functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, breathing and digestion. It's associated with having very high blood pressure while lying down.
Low blood pressure (hypotension) can occur in anyone, though certain types of low blood pressure are more common depending on your age or other factors:
Age. Drops in blood pressure on standing or after eating occur primarily in adults older than 65. Neurally mediated hypotension primarily affects children and younger adults.
Medications. People who take certain medications, for example, high blood pressure medications such as alpha blockers, have a greater risk of low blood pressure.
Certain diseases. Parkinson's disease, diabetes and some heart conditions put you at a greater risk of developing low blood pressure.
Even moderate forms of low blood pressure can cause dizziness, weakness, fainting and a risk of injury from falls.
And severely low blood pressure can deprive your body of enough oxygen to carry out its functions, leading to damage to your heart and brain.
If you want to have sex less often than your partner does, neither one of you is necessarily outside the norm for people at your stage in life — although your differences may cause distress.
Similarly, even if your sex drive is weaker than it once was, your relationship may be stronger than ever. Bottom line: There is no magic number to define low sex drive. It varies among women.
Symptoms of low sex drive in women include: Having no interest in any type of sexual activity, including masturbation, Never or only seldom having sexual fantasies or thoughts, Being concerned by your lack of sexual activity or fantasies.
If you're concerned by your low desire for sex, talk to your doctor. The solution could be as simple as changing a medication you are taking, and improving any chronic medical conditions such as high blood pressure or diabetes.
Desire for sex is based on a complex interaction of many things affecting intimacy, including physical and emotional well-being, experiences, beliefs, lifestyle, and your current relationship. If you're experiencing a problem in any of these areas, it can affect your desire for sex.
A wide range of illnesses, physical changes and medications can cause a low sex drive, including:
Sexual problems. If you have pain during sex or can't orgasm, it can reduce your desire for sex.
Medical diseases. Many nonsexual diseases can affect sex drive, including arthritis, cancer, diabetes, high blood pressure, coronary artery disease and neurological diseases.
Medications. Certain prescription drugs, especially antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, are known to lower the sex drive.
Lifestyle habits. A glass of wine may put you in the mood, but too much alcohol can affect your sex drive. The same is true of street drugs. Also, smoking decreases blood flow, which may dull arousal.
Surgery. Any surgery related to your breasts or genital tract can affect your body image, sexual function and desire for sex.
Fatigue. Exhaustion from caring for young children or aging parents can contribute to low sex drive. Fatigue from illness or surgery also can play a role in a low sex drive.
Changes in your hormone levels may alter your desire for sex. This can occur during:
Menopause. Estrogen levels drop during the transition to menopause. This can make you less interested in sex and cause dry vaginal tissues, resulting in painful or uncomfortable sex. Although many women still have satisfying sex during menopause and beyond, some experience a lagging libido during this hormonal change.
Pregnancy and breast-feeding. Hormone changes during pregnancy, just after having a baby and during breast-feeding can put a damper on sex drive. Fatigue, changes in body image, and the pressures of pregnancy or caring for a new baby also can contribute to changes in your sexual desire.
Your state of mind can affect your sexual desire. There are many psychological causes of low sex drive, including: Mental health problems, such as anxiety or depression, Stress, such as financial stress or work stress, Poor body image, Low self-esteem, History of physical or sexual abuse, Previous negative sexual experiences.
For many women, emotional closeness is an essential prelude to sexual intimacy. So problems in your relationship can be a major factor in low sex drive. Decreased interest in sex is often a result of ongoing issues, such as: Lack of connection with your partner, Unresolved conflicts or fights, Poor communication of sexual needs and preferences, Trust issues.
The main sign of low sperm count is the inability to conceive a child. There might be no other obvious signs or symptoms. In some men, an underlying problem such as an inherited chromosomal abnormality, a hormonal imbalance, dilated testicular veins or a condition that blocks the passage of sperm may cause signs and symptoms.
Low sperm count symptoms might include: Problems with sexual function — for example, low sex drive or difficulty maintaining an erection (erectile dysfunction), Pain, swelling or a lump in the testicle area, Decreased facial or body hair or other signs of a chromosome or hormone abnormality.
See a doctor if you have been unable to conceive a child after a year of regular, unprotected intercourse or sooner if you have any of the following: Erection or ejaculation problems, low sex drive, or other problems with sexual function, Pain, discomfort, a lump or swelling in the testicle area, A history of testicle, prostate or sexual problems, A groin, testicle, penis or scrotum surgery.
The production of sperm is a complex process and requires normal functioning of the testicles (testes) as well as the hypothalamus and pituitary glands — organs in your brain that produce hormones that trigger sperm production. Once sperm are produced in the testicles, delicate tubes transport them until they mix with semen and are ejaculated out of the penis. Problems with any of these systems can affect sperm production.
Also, there can be problems of abnormal sperm shape (morphology), movement (motility) or function.
However, often the cause of low sperm count isn't identified.
Low sperm count can be caused by a number of health issues and medical treatments. Some of these include:
Varicocele. A varicocele (VAR-ih-koe-seel) is a swelling of the veins that drain the testicle. It's the most common reversible cause of male infertility. Although the exact reason that varicoceles cause infertility is unknown, it might be related to abnormal testicular temperature regulation. Varicoceles result in reduced quality of the sperm.
Infection. Some infections can interfere with sperm production or sperm health or can cause scarring that blocks the passage of sperm. These include inflammation of the epididymis (epididymitis) or testicles (orchitis) and some sexually transmitted infections, including gonorrhea or HIV. Although some infections can result in permanent testicular damage, most often sperm can still be retrieved.
Ejaculation problems. Retrograde ejaculation occurs when semen enters the bladder during orgasm instead of emerging out of the tip of the penis. Various health conditions can cause retrograde ejaculation or lack of ejaculation, including diabetes, spinal injuries, and surgery of the bladder, prostate or urethra.
Certain medications also might result in ejaculatory problems, such as blood pressure medications known as alpha blockers. Some ejaculatory problems can be reversed, while others are permanent. In most cases of permanent ejaculation problems, sperm can still be retrieved directly from the testicles.
Antibodies that attack sperm. Anti-sperm antibodies are immune system cells that mistakenly identify sperm as harmful invaders and attempt to destroy them.
Tumors. Cancers and nonmalignant tumors can affect the male reproductive organs directly, through the glands that release hormones related to reproduction, such as the pituitary gland, or through unknown causes. Surgery, radiation or chemotherapy to treat tumors also can affect male fertility.
Undescended testicles. During fetal development one or both testicles sometimes fail to descend from the abdomen into the sac that normally contains the testicles (scrotum). Decreased fertility is more likely in men with this condition.
Hormone imbalances. The hypothalamus, pituitary and testicles produce hormones that are necessary to create sperm. Alterations in these hormones, as well as from other systems such as the thyroid and adrenal gland, may impair sperm production.
Defects of tubules that transport sperm. Many different tubes carry sperm. They can be blocked due to various causes, including inadvertent injury from surgery, prior infections, trauma or abnormal development, such as with cystic fibrosis or similar inherited conditions.
Blockage can occur at any level, including within the testicle, in the tubes that drain the testicle, in the epididymis, in the vas deferens, near the ejaculatory ducts or in the urethra.
Chromosome defects. Inherited disorders such as Klinefelter's syndrome — in which a male is born with two X chromosomes and one Y chromosome instead of one X and one Y — cause abnormal development of the male reproductive organs. Other genetic syndromes associated with infertility include cystic fibrosis, Kallmann's syndrome and Kartagener's syndrome.
Celiac disease. A digestive disorder caused by sensitivity to gluten, celiac disease can cause male infertility. Fertility may improve after adopting a gluten-free diet.
Certain medications. Testosterone replacement therapy, long-term anabolic steroid use, cancer medications (chemotherapy), certain antifungal and antibiotic medications, some ulcer medications, and other medications can impair sperm production and decrease male fertility.
Prior surgeries. Certain surgeries might prevent you from having sperm in your ejaculate, including vasectomy, inguinal hernia repairs, scrotal or testicular surgeries, prostate surgeries, and large abdominal surgeries performed for testicular and rectal cancers, among others. In most cases, surgery can be performed to either reverse these blockages or to retrieve sperm directly from the epididymis and testicles.
Sperm production or function can be affected by overexposure to certain environmental elements, including:
Industrial chemicals. Extended exposure to benzenes, toluene, xylene, herbicides, pesticides, organic solvents, painting materials and lead might contribute to low sperm counts.
Heavy metal exposure. Exposure to lead or other heavy metals also can cause infertility.
Radiation or X-rays. Exposure to radiation can reduce sperm production. It can take several years for sperm production to return to normal. With high doses of radiation, sperm production can be permanently reduced.
Overheating the testicles. Elevated temperatures impair sperm production and function.Although studies are limited and are inconclusive, frequent use of saunas or hot tubs might temporarily impair sperm count.
Sitting for long periods, wearing tight clothing or working on a laptop computer for long stretches of time also might increase the temperature in your scrotum and slightly reduce sperm production.
Other causes of low sperm count include:
Drug use. Anabolic steroids taken to stimulate muscle strength and growth can cause the testicles to shrink and sperm production to decrease. Use of cocaine or marijuana might reduce the number and quality of your sperm as well.
Alcohol use. Drinking alcohol can lower testosterone levels and cause decreased sperm production.
Occupation. Certain occupations might be linked with a risk of infertility, including welding or those associated with prolonged sitting, such as truck driving. However, the data to support these associations is inconsistent.
Tobacco smoking. Men who smoke might have a lower sperm count than do those who don't smoke.
Emotional stress. Severe or prolonged emotional stress, including stress about fertility, might interfere with hormones needed to produce sperm.
Depression. Being depressed may negatively affect sperm concentration.
Weight. Obesity can impair fertility in several ways, including directly impacting sperm and by causing hormone changes that reduce male fertility.
Sperm testing issues. Lower than normal sperm counts can result from testing a sperm sample that was taken too soon after your last ejaculation; was taken too soon after an illness or stressful event; or didn't contain all of the semen you ejaculated because some was spilled during collection. For this reason, results are generally based on several samples taken over a period of time.
A number of risk factors are linked to low sperm count and other problems that can cause low sperm count. They include: Smoking tobacco, Drinking alcohol, Using certain illicit drugs, Being overweight, Being severely depressed or stressed, Having certain past or present infections, Being exposed to toxins, Overheating the testicles, Having experienced trauma to the testicles, Being born with a fertility disorder or having a blood relative, such as your brother or father, with a fertility disorder, Having certain medical conditions, including tumors and chronic illnesses, Undergoing cancer treatments, such as radiation, Taking certain medications, Having a prior vasectomy or major abdominal or pelvic surgery, Having a history of undescended testicles.
Infertility caused by low sperm count can be stressful for both you and your partner. Complications can include: Surgery or other treatments for an underlying cause of low sperm count, Expensive and involved assisted reproductive techniques, such as in vitro fertilization (IVF), Stress related to the inability to have a child.
Lung cancer typically doesn't cause signs and symptoms in its earliest stages. Signs and symptoms of lung cancer typically occur when the disease is advanced.
Signs and symptoms of lung cancer may include: A new cough that doesn't go away, Coughing up blood, even a small amount, Shortness of breath, Chest pain, Hoarseness, Losing weight without trying, Bone pain, Headache.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
If you smoke and have been unable to quit, make an appointment with your doctor. Your doctor can recommend strategies for quitting smoking, such as counseling, medications and nicotine replacement products.
Smoking causes the majority of lung cancers — both in smokers and in people exposed to secondhand smoke. But lung cancer also occurs in people who never smoked and in those who never had prolonged exposure to secondhand smoke. In these cases, there may be no clear cause of lung cancer.
Doctors believe smoking causes lung cancer by damaging the cells that line the lungs. When you inhale cigarette smoke, which is full of cancer-causing substances (carcinogens), changes in the lung tissue begin almost immediately.
At first your body may be able to repair this damage. But with each repeated exposure, normal cells that line your lungs are increasingly damaged. Over time, the damage causes cells to act abnormally and eventually cancer may develop.
Doctors divide lung cancer into two major types based on the appearance of lung cancer cells under the microscope. Your doctor makes treatment decisions based on which major type of lung cancer you have.
The two general types of lung cancer include:
Small cell lung cancer. Small cell lung cancer occurs almost exclusively in heavy smokers and is less common than non-small cell lung cancer.
Non-small cell lung cancer. Non-small cell lung cancer is an umbrella term for several types of lung cancers. Non-small cell lung cancers include squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma and large cell carcinoma.
A number of factors may increase your risk of lung cancer. Some risk factors can be controlled, for instance, by quitting smoking. And other factors can't be controlled, such as your family history.
Risk factors for lung cancer include:
Smoking. Your risk of lung cancer increases with the number of cigarettes you smoke each day and the number of years you have smoked. Quitting at any age can significantly lower your risk of developing lung cancer.
Exposure to secondhand smoke. Even if you don't smoke, your risk of lung cancer increases if you're exposed to secondhand smoke.
Previous radiation therapy. If you've undergone radiation therapy to the chest for another type of cancer, you may have an increased risk of developing lung cancer.
Exposure to radon gas. Radon is produced by the natural breakdown of uranium in soil, rock and water that eventually becomes part of the air you breathe. Unsafe levels of radon can accumulate in any building, including homes.
Exposure to asbestos and other carcinogens. Workplace exposure to asbestos and other substances known to cause cancer — such as arsenic, chromium and nickel — can increase your risk of developing lung cancer, especially if you're a smoker.
Family history of lung cancer. People with a parent, sibling or child with lung cancer have an increased risk of the disease.
Lung cancer can cause complications, such as:
Shortness of breath. People with lung cancer can experience shortness of breath if cancer grows to block the major airways. Lung cancer can also cause fluid to accumulate around the lungs, making it harder for the affected lung to expand fully when you inhale.
Coughing up blood. Lung cancer can cause bleeding in the airway, which can cause you to cough up blood (hemoptysis). Sometimes bleeding can become severe. Treatments are available to control bleeding.
Pain. Advanced lung cancer that spreads to the lining of a lung or to another area of the body, such as a bone, can cause pain. Tell your doctor if you experience pain, as many treatments are available to control pain.
Fluid in the chest (pleural effusion). Lung cancer can cause fluid to accumulate in the space that surrounds the affected lung in the chest cavity (pleural space).
Fluid accumulating in the chest can cause shortness of breath. Treatments are available to drain the fluid from your chest and reduce the risk that pleural effusion will occur again.
Cancer that spreads to other parts of the body (metastasis). Lung cancer often spreads (metastasizes) to other parts of the body, such as the brain and the bones.
Cancer that spreads can cause pain, nausea, headaches, or other signs and symptoms depending on what organ is affected. Once lung cancer has spread beyond the lungs, it's generally not curable. Treatments are available to decrease signs and symptoms and to help you live longer.
Signs and symptoms of lupus nephritis include: Blood in your urine, Foamy urine (due to excess protein in urine), High blood pressure, Swelling in your hands, ankles or feet, High levels of a waste product called creatinine in your blood.
As many as half of adults with systemic lupus develop lupus nephritis. Systemic lupus causes immune system proteins to damage the kidneys, harming their ability to filter out waste.
There aren't a lot of known risk factors for lupus nephritis, except for:
Sex. Although women are more likely to get lupus, men get lupus nephritis more than women.
Race or ethnicity. Blacks, Hispanics/Latinos and Asian Americans are more likely to have lupus nephritis than whites.
No two cases of lupus are exactly alike. Signs and symptoms may come on suddenly or develop slowly, may be mild or severe, and may be temporary or permanent. Most people with lupus have mild disease characterized by episodes — called flares — when signs and symptoms get worse for a while, then improve or even disappear completely for a time.
The signs and symptoms of lupus that you experience will depend on which body systems are affected by the disease. The most common signs and symptoms include: Fatigue, Fever, Joint pain, stiffness and swelling, Butterfly-shaped rash on the face that covers the cheeks and bridge of the nose or rashes elsewhere on the body, Skin lesions that appear or worsen with sun exposure (photosensitivity), Fingers and toes that turn white or blue when exposed to cold or during stressful periods (Raynaud's phenomenon), Shortness of breath, Chest pain, Dry eyes, Headaches, confusion and memory loss.
See your doctor if you develop an unexplained rash, ongoing fever, persistent aching or fatigue.
Lupus occurs when your immune system attacks healthy tissue in your body (autoimmune disease). It's likely that lupus results from a combination of your genetics and your environment.
It appears that people with an inherited predisposition for lupus may develop the disease when they come into contact with something in the environment that can trigger lupus. The cause of lupus in most cases, however, is unknown.  Some potential triggers include:
Sunlight. Exposure to the sun may bring on lupus skin lesions or trigger an internal response in susceptible people.
Infections. Having an infection can initiate lupus or cause a relapse in some people.
Medications. Lupus can be triggered by certain types of blood pressure medications, anti-seizure medications and antibiotics. People who have drug-induced lupus usually get better when they stop taking the medication. Rarely, symptoms may persist even after the drug is stopped.
Factors that may increase your risk of lupus include:
Your sex. Lupus is more common in women.
Age. Although lupus affects people of all ages, it's most often diagnosed between the ages of 15 and 45.
Race. Lupus is more common in African-Americans, Hispanics and Asian-Americans.
Inflammation caused by lupus can affect many areas of your body, including your:
Kidneys. Lupus can cause serious kidney damage, and kidney failure is one of the leading causes of death among people with lupus.
Brain and central nervous system. If your brain is affected by lupus, you may experience headaches, dizziness, behavior changes, vision problems, and even strokes or seizures. Many people with lupus experience memory problems and may have difficulty expressing their thoughts.
Blood and blood vessels. Lupus may lead to blood problems, including anemia and increased risk of bleeding or blood clotting. It can also cause inflammation of the blood vessels (vasculitis).
Lungs. Having lupus increases your chances of developing an inflammation of the chest cavity lining (pleurisy), which can make breathing painful. Bleeding into lungs and pneumonia also are possible.
Heart. Lupus can cause inflammation of your heart muscle, your arteries or heart membrane (pericarditis). The risk of cardiovascular disease and heart attacks increases greatly as well.
Having lupus also increases your risk of:
Infection. People with lupus are more vulnerable to infection because both the disease and its treatments can weaken the immune system.
Cancer. Having lupus appears to increase your risk of cancer; however the risk is small.
Bone tissue death (avascular necrosis). This occurs when the blood supply to a bone diminishes, often leading to tiny breaks in the bone and eventually to the bone's collapse.
Pregnancy complications. Women with lupus have an increased risk of miscarriage. Lupus increases the risk of high blood pressure during pregnancy (preeclampsia) and preterm birth. To reduce the risk of these complications, doctors often recommend delaying pregnancy until your disease has been under control for at least six months.
The signs and symptoms of Lyme disease vary. They usually appear in stages, but the stages can overlap.
A small, red bump, similar to the bump of a mosquito bite, often appears at the site of a tick bite or tick removal and resolves over a few days. This normal occurrence doesn't indicate Lyme disease.
However, these signs and symptoms can occur within a month after you've been infected:
Rash. From three to 30 days after an infected tick bite, an expanding red area might appear that sometimes clears in the center, forming a bull's-eye pattern. The rash (erythema migrans) expands slowly over days and can spread to 12 inches (30 centimeters) across. It's typically not itchy or painful but might feel warm to the touch.
Erythema migrans is one of the hallmarks of Lyme disease, although not everyone with Lyme disease develops the rash. Some people develop this rash at more than one place on their bodies.
Other symptoms. Fever, chills, fatigue, body aches, headache, neck stiffness and swollen lymph nodes can accompany the rash.
If untreated, new signs and symptoms of Lyme infection might appear in the following weeks to months. These include:
Erythema migrans. The rash may appear on other areas of your body.
Joint pain. Bouts of severe joint pain and swelling are especially likely to affect your knees, but the pain can shift from one joint to another.
Neurological problems. Weeks, months or even years after infection, you might develop inflammation of the membranes surrounding your brain (meningitis), temporary paralysis of one side of your face (Bell's palsy), numbness or weakness in your limbs, and impaired muscle movement.
Several weeks after infection, some people develop: Heart problems, such as an irregular heartbeat, Eye inflammation, Liver inflammation (hepatitis), Severe fatigue.
Only a minority of tick bites leads to Lyme disease. The longer the tick remains attached to your skin, the greater your risk of getting the disease. Lyme infection is unlikely if the tick is attached for less than 36 to 48 hours.
If you think you've been bitten and have signs and symptoms of Lyme disease — particularly if you live in an area where Lyme disease is common — contact your doctor. Treatment for Lyme disease is more effective if begun early.
Visit your doctor even if signs and symptoms disappear — the absence of symptoms doesn't mean the disease is gone. Untreated, Lyme disease can spread to other parts of your body for several months to years after infection, causing arthritis and nervous system problems. Ticks can also transmit other illnesses, such as babesiosis and Colorado tick fever.
In the United States, Lyme disease is caused by the bacteria Borrelia burgdorferi and Borrelia mayonii, carried primarily by black-legged or deer ticks. Young brown ticks often are no bigger than a poppy seed, which can make them nearly impossible to spot.
To contract Lyme disease, an infected deer tick must bite you. The bacteria enter your skin through the bite and eventually make their way into your bloodstream.
In most cases, to transmit Lyme disease, a deer tick must be attached for 36 to 48 hours. If you find an attached tick that looks swollen, it may have fed long enough to transmit bacteria. Removing the tick as soon as possible might prevent infection.
Where you live or vacation can affect your chances of getting Lyme disease. So can your profession and the outdoor activities you enjoy. The most common risk factors for Lyme disease include:
Spending time in wooded or grassy areas. In the United States, deer ticks are found mostly in the heavily wooded areas of the Northeast and Midwest. Children who spend a lot of time outdoors in these regions are especially at risk. Adults with outdoor jobs also are at increased risk.
Having exposed skin. Ticks attach easily to bare flesh. If you're in an area where ticks are common, protect yourself and your children by wearing long sleeves and long pants. Don't allow your pets to wander in tall weeds and grasses.
Not removing ticks promptly or properly. Bacteria from a tick bite can enter your bloodstream if the tick stays attached to your skin for 36 to 48 hours or longer. If you remove a tick within two days, your risk of getting Lyme disease is low.
Untreated Lyme disease can cause: Chronic joint inflammation (Lyme arthritis), particularly of the knee, Neurological symptoms, such as facial palsy and neuropathy, Cognitive defects, such as impaired memory, Heart rhythm irregularities.
Lymphedema signs and symptoms, which occur in your affected arm or leg, include: Swelling of part or all of your arm or leg, including fingers or toes, A feeling of heaviness or tightness, Restricted range of motion, Aching or discomfort, Recurring infections, Hardening and thickening of the skin (fibrosis).
The swelling caused by lymphedema ranges from mild, hardly noticeable changes in the size of your arm or leg to extreme changes that make the limb hard to use. Lymphedema caused by cancer treatment may not occur until months or years after treatment.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice persistent swelling in your arm or leg.
If you already have the diagnosis of lymphedema of a limb, see your doctor if there is a sudden dramatic increase in the size of the involved limb, as it may suggest a new process is occurring.
Your lymphatic system is crucial to keeping your body healthy. It circulates protein-rich lymph fluid throughout your body, collecting bacteria, viruses and waste products. Your lymphatic system carries this fluid and harmful substances through your lymph vessels, which lead to lymph nodes. The wastes are then filtered out by lymphocytes — infection-fighting cells that live in your lymph nodes — and ultimately flushed from your body.
Lymphedema occurs when your lymph vessels are unable to adequately drain lymph fluid, usually from an arm or leg. Lymphedema can be either primary or secondary. This means it can occur on its own (primary lymphedema), or it can be caused by another disease or condition (secondary lymphedema). Secondary lymphedema is far more common than primary lymphedema.
Any condition or procedure that damages your lymph nodes or lymph vessels can cause lymphedema. Causes include:
Surgery. Removal of or injury to lymph nodes and lymph vessels may result in lymphedema. For example, lymph nodes may be removed to check for spread of breast cancer, and lymph nodes may be injured in surgery that involves blood vessels in your limbs.
Radiation treatment for cancer. Radiation can cause scarring and inflammation of your lymph nodes or lymph vessels.
Cancer. If cancer cells block lymphatic vessels, lymphedema may result. For instance, a tumor growing near a lymph node or lymph vessel could enlarge enough to block the flow of the lymph fluid.
Infection. An infection of the lymph nodes or parasites can restrict the flow of lymph fluid. Infection-related lymphedema is most common in tropical and subtropical regions and is more likely to occur in developing countries.
Primary lymphedema is a rare, inherited condition caused by problems with the development of lymph vessels in your body.  Specific causes of primary lymphedema include:
Milroy's disease (congenital lymphedema). This disorder begins in infancy and causes lymph nodes to form abnormally.
Meige's disease (lymphedema praecox).  This disorder often causes lymphedema around puberty or during pregnancy, though it can occur later, until age 35.
Late-onset lymphedema (lymphedema tarda).  This occurs rarely and usually begins after age 35.
Factors that may increase your risk of developing lymphedema after cancer, from cancer treatment or from other secondary causes include: Older age, Excess weight or obesity, Rheumatoid or psoriatic arthritis.
Lymphedema in your arm or leg can lead to serious complications, such as:
Infections. Possible infections that can result from lymphedema include a serious bacterial infection of the skin (cellulitis) and an infection of the lymph vessels (lymphangitis). The smallest injury to your arm or leg can be an entry point for infection.
Lymphangiosarcoma. This rare form of soft tissue cancer can result from the most-severe cases of untreated lymphedema. Possible signs of lymphangiosarcoma include blue-red or purple marks on the skin.
Signs and symptoms of lymphoma may include: Painless swelling of lymph nodes in your neck, armpits or groin, Persistent fatigue, Fever, Night sweats, Shortness of breath, Unexplained weight loss, Itchy skin.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
Doctors aren't sure what causes lymphoma. But it begins when a disease-fighting white blood cell called a lymphocyte develops a genetic mutation. The mutation tells the cell to multiply rapidly, causing many diseased lymphocytes that continue multiplying.
The mutation also allows the cells to go on living when other normal cells would die. This causes too many diseased and ineffective lymphocytes in your lymph nodes and causes the lymph nodes, spleen and liver to swell.
Factors that can increase the risk of lymphoma include:
Your age. Some types of lymphoma are more common in young adults, while others are most often diagnosed in people over 55.
Being male. Males are slightly more likely to develop lymphoma than are females.
Having an impaired immune system. Lymphoma is more common in people with immune system diseases or in people who take drugs that suppress their immune system.
Developing certain infections. Some infections are associated with an increased risk of lymphoma, including the Epstein-Barr virus and Helicobacter pylori infection.
People with Lynch syndrome may experience: Colon cancer that occurs at a younger age, especially before age 50, A family history of colon cancer that occurs at a young age, A family history of cancer that affects the uterus (endometrial cancer), A family history of other related cancers, including ovarian cancer, kidney cancer, stomach cancer, small intestine cancer, liver cancer, sweat gland cancer (sebaceous carcinoma) and other cancers.
If you have concerns about your family history of colon or endometrial cancer, bring them up with your doctor. Together, you and your doctor may consider having a genetic evaluation of your family history and your cancer risk.
If a family member has been diagnosed with Lynch syndrome, tell your doctor. Ask to be referred to a genetic counselor. Genetic counselors are trained in genetics and counseling. They can help you understand Lynch syndrome, what causes it and what type of care is recommended for people who have Lynch syndrome. A genetic counselor can also help you sort through all the information about the disease and help you understand whether genetic testing is appropriate for you.
Lynch syndrome runs in families in an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. This means that if one parent carries a gene mutation for Lynch syndrome, there's a 50 percent chance that mutation will be passed on to each child. The risk of Lynch syndrome is the same whether the gene mutation carrier is the mother or father or whether the child is a son or daughter.
The genes affected in Lynch syndrome are responsible for correcting changes in the genetic code (mismatch repair genes).
Your genes contain DNA, which carries instructions for every chemical process in your body. As your cells grow and divide, they make copies of their DNA and it's not uncommon for some minor mistakes to occur.
Normal cells have mechanisms to recognize mistakes and repair them. But the cells of people who inherit one of the abnormal genes associated with Lynch syndrome lack the ability to repair these minor mistakes. An accumulation of these mistakes leads to increasing genetic damage within cells and eventually can cause the cells to become cancerous.
Beyond causing complications for your health, a genetic disorder such as Lynch syndrome may raise other concerns. A genetic counselor is trained to help you navigate the areas of your life that may be affected by your diagnosis, such as:
Your privacy. The results of your genetic test will be listed in your medical record, which may be accessed by insurance companies and employers. You may have questions about whether being diagnosed with Lynch syndrome will make it difficult to change jobs or health insurance providers in the future. A genetic counselor can explain the laws that may protect you.
Your children. If you have Lynch syndrome, your children have a risk of inheriting your genetic mutations. If one parent carries a genetic mutation for Lynch syndrome, each child has a 50 percent chance of inheriting that mutation. A genetic counselor can help you develop a plan for discussing this with your children, including how and when to tell them and when they should consider testing.
Your extended family. A Lynch syndrome diagnosis has implications for your entire family, as many other blood relatives may have a chance of having Lynch syndrome. A genetic counselor can assist you in finding the best way to tell family members that you're having genetic testing and what that the results mean.
A malaria infection is generally characterized by the following signs and symptoms: Fever, Chills, Headache, Nausea and vomiting, Muscle pain and fatigue.
Other signs and symptoms may include: Sweating, Chest or abdominal pain, Cough.
Some people who have malaria experience cycles of malaria "attacks." An attack usually starts with shivering and chills, followed by a high fever, followed by sweating and a return to normal temperature. Malaria signs and symptoms typically begin within a few weeks after being bitten by an infected mosquito. However, some types of malaria parasites can lie dormant in your body for up to a year.
Talk to your doctor if you experience a fever while living in or after traveling to a high-risk malaria region. The parasites that cause malaria can lie dormant in your body for up to a year. If you have severe symptoms, seek emergency medical attention.
Malaria is caused by a type of microscopic parasite. The parasite is transmitted to humans most commonly through mosquito bites.
Uninfected mosquito. A mosquito becomes infected by feeding on a person who has malaria.
Transmission of parasite. If this mosquito bites you in the future, it can transmit malaria parasites to you.
In the liver. Once the parasites enter your body, they travel to your liver — where some types can lie dormant for as long as a year.
Into the bloodstream. When the parasites mature, they leave the liver and infect your red blood cells. This is when people typically develop malaria symptoms.
On to the next person. If an uninfected mosquito bites you at this point in the cycle, it will become infected with your malaria parasites and can spread them to the other people it bites.
Because the parasites that cause malaria affect red blood cells, people can also catch malaria from exposure to infected blood, including: From mother to unborn child, Through blood transfusions, By sharing needles used to inject drugs.
The biggest risk factor for developing malaria is to live in or to visit areas where the disease is common. There are many different varieties of malaria parasites. The variety that causes the most serious complications is most commonly found in: African countries south of the Sahara Desert, The Asian subcontinent, New Guinea, the Dominican Republic and Haiti.
People at increased risk of serious disease include: Young children and infants, Older adults, Travelers coming from areas with no malaria, Pregnant women and their unborn children.
Poverty, lack of knowledge, and little or no access to health care also contribute to malaria deaths worldwide.
Residents of a malaria region may be exposed to the disease so frequently that they acquire a partial immunity, which can lessen the severity of malaria symptoms. However, this partial immunity can disappear if you move to a country where you're no longer frequently exposed to the parasite.
Malaria can be fatal, particularly malaria caused by the variety of parasite that's common in tropical parts of Africa. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that 91 percent of all malaria deaths occur in Africa — most commonly in children under the age of 5.
In most cases, malaria deaths are related to one or more serious complications, including:
Cerebral malaria. If parasite-filled blood cells block small blood vessels to your brain (cerebral malaria), swelling of your brain or brain damage may occur. Cerebral malaria may cause seizures and coma.
Breathing problems. Accumulated fluid in your lungs (pulmonary edema) can make it difficult to breathe.
Organ failure. Malaria can cause your kidneys or liver to fail, or your spleen to rupture. Any of these conditions can be life-threatening.
Anemia. Malaria damages red blood cells, which can result in anemia.
Low blood sugar. Severe forms of malaria itself can cause low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), as can quinine — one of the most common medications used to combat malaria. Very low blood sugar can result in coma or death.
Some varieties of the malaria parasite, which typically cause milder forms of the disease, can persist for years and cause relapses.
Signs and symptoms of male breast cancer can include: A painless lump or thickening in your breast tissue, Changes to the skin covering your breast, such as dimpling, puckering, redness or scaling, Changes to your nipple, such as redness or scaling, or a nipple that begins to turn inward, Discharge from your nipple.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes male breast cancer.
Doctors know that male breast cancer occurs when some breast cells divide more rapidly than healthy cells do. The accumulating cells form a tumor that may spread (metastasize) to nearby tissue, to the lymph nodes or to other parts of the body.
Everyone is born with a small amount of breast tissue. Breast tissue consists of milk-producing glands (lobules), ducts that carry milk to the nipples, and fat.
During puberty, women begin developing more breast tissue, and men do not. But because men are born with a small amount of breast tissue, they can develop breast cancer.
Types of breast cancer diagnosed in men include:
Cancer that begins in the milk ducts (ductal carcinoma). Nearly all male breast cancer is ductal carcinoma.
Cancer that begins in the milk-producing glands (lobular carcinoma). This type is rare in men because they have few lobules in their breast tissue.
Other types of cancer. Other, rarer types of breast cancer that can occur in men include Paget's disease of the nipple and inflammatory breast cancer.
Some men inherit abnormal (mutated) genes from their parents that increase the risk of breast cancer. Mutations in one of several genes, especially a gene called BRCA2, put you at greater risk of developing breast and prostate cancers.
If you have a strong family history of cancer, discuss this with your doctor. Your doctor may recommend that you meet with a genetic counselor in order to consider genetic testing to see if you carry genes that increase your risk of cancer.
Factors that increase the risk of male breast cancer include:
Older age. The risk of breast cancer increases as you age. Male breast cancer is most often diagnosed in men in their 60s.
Exposure to estrogen. If you take estrogen-related drugs, such as those used for hormone therapy for prostate cancer, your risk of breast cancer is increased.
Family history of breast cancer. If you have a close family member with breast cancer, you have a greater chance of developing the disease.
Klinefelter's syndrome. This genetic syndrome occurs when boys are born with more than one copy of the X chromosome. Klinefelter's syndrome causes abnormal development of the testicles. As a result, men with this syndrome produce lower levels of certain male hormones (androgens) and more female hormones (estrogens).
Liver disease. Certain conditions, such as cirrhosis of the liver, can reduce male hormones and increase female hormones, increasing your risk of breast cancer.
Obesity. Obesity is associated with higher levels of estrogen in the body, which increases the risk of male breast cancer.
Testicle disease or surgery. Having inflamed testicles (orchitis) or surgery to remove a testicle (orchiectomy) can increase your risk of male breast cancer.
Hypogonadism can begin during fetal development, before puberty or during adulthood. Signs and symptoms depend on when the condition develops.
If the body doesn't produce enough testosterone during fetal development, the result may be impaired growth of the external sex organs. Depending on when hypogonadism develops and how much testosterone is present, a child who is genetically male may be born with: Female genitals, Genitals that are neither clearly male nor clearly female (ambiguous genitals), Underdeveloped male genitals.
Male hypogonadism can delay puberty or cause incomplete or lack of normal development. It can hamper: Development of muscle mass, Voice deepening, Growth of body and facial hair, Growth of the penis and testicles.
And it can cause: Excessive growth of the arms and legs in relation to the trunk of the body, Development of breast tissue (gynecomastia).
In adult males, hypogonadism can alter certain masculine physical characteristics and impair normal reproductive function. Early signs and symptoms might include: Decreased sex drive, Decreased energy, Depression.
Over time, men with hypogonadism can develop: Erectile dysfunction, Infertility, Decrease in hair growth on the face and body, Decrease in muscle mass, Development of breast tissue (gynecomastia), Loss of bone mass (osteoporosis).
Severe hypogonadism can also cause mental and emotional changes. As testosterone decreases, some men have symptoms similar to those of menopause in women. These can include: Difficulty concentrating, Hot flashes.
See a doctor if you have symptoms of male hypogonadism. Finding the cause of hypogonadism is an important first step to getting appropriate treatment.
Male hypogonadism means the testicles don't produce enough of the male sex hormone testosterone. There are two basic types of hypogonadism:
Primary. This type of hypogonadism — also known as primary testicular failure — originates from a problem in the testicles.
Secondary. This type of hypogonadism indicates a problem in the hypothalamus or the pituitary gland — parts of the brain that signal the testicles to produce testosterone. The hypothalamus produces gonadotropin-releasing hormone, which signals the pituitary gland to make follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). Luteinizing hormone then signals the testes to produce testosterone.
Either type of hypogonadism can be caused by an inherited (congenital) trait or something that happens later in life (acquired), such as an injury or an infection. At times, primary and secondary hypogonadism occur together.
Common causes of primary hypogonadism include:
Klinefelter syndrome. This condition results from a congenital abnormality of the sex chromosomes, X and Y. A male normally has one X and one Y chromosome. In Klinefelter syndrome, two or more X chromosomes are present in addition to one Y chromosome.
The Y chromosome contains the genetic material that determines the sex of a child and related development. The extra X chromosome that occurs in Klinefelter syndrome causes abnormal development of the testicles, which in turn results in underproduction of testosterone.
Undescended testicles. Before birth, the testicles develop inside the abdomen and normally move down into their permanent place in the scrotum. Sometimes one or both of the testicles aren't descended at birth.
This condition often corrects itself within the first few years of life without treatment. If not corrected in early childhood, it can lead to malfunction of the testicles and reduced production of testosterone.
Mumps orchitis. A mumps infection involving the testicles that occurs during adolescence or adulthood can damage the testicles, affecting the function of the testicles and testosterone production.
Hemochromatosis. Too much iron in the blood can cause testicular failure or pituitary gland dysfunction, affecting testosterone production.
Injury to the testicles. Because they're outside the abdomen, the testicles are prone to injury. Damage to normally developed testicles can cause hypogonadism. Damage to one testicle might not impair total testosterone production.
Cancer treatment. Chemotherapy or radiation therapy for the treatment of cancer can interfere with testosterone and sperm production. The effects of both treatments often are temporary, but permanent infertility may occur.
Although many men regain their fertility within a few months after treatment, preserving sperm before starting cancer therapy is an option for men.
In secondary hypogonadism, the testicles are normal but don't function properly due to a problem with the pituitary or hypothalamus. A number of conditions can cause secondary hypogonadism, including:
Kallmann's syndrome. This is an abnormal development of the area of the brain that controls the secretion of pituitary hormones (hypothalamus). This abnormality can also affect the ability to smell (anosmia) and cause red-green color blindness.
Pituitary disorders. An abnormality in the pituitary gland can impair the release of hormones from the pituitary gland to the testicles, affecting normal testosterone production. A pituitary tumor or other type of brain tumor located near the pituitary gland may cause testosterone or other hormone deficiencies.
Also, treatment for a brain tumor, such as surgery or radiation therapy, can affect the pituitary gland and cause hypogonadism.
Inflammatory disease. Certain inflammatory diseases, such as sarcoidosis, histiocytosis and tuberculosis, involve the hypothalamus and pituitary gland and can affect testosterone production.
HIV/AIDS. HIV/AIDS can cause low levels of testosterone by affecting the hypothalamus, the pituitary and the testes.
Medications. The use of certain drugs, such as opiate pain medications and some hormones, can affect testosterone production.
Obesity. Being significantly overweight at any age might be linked to hypogonadism.
Normal aging. As men age, there's a slow, progressive decrease in testosterone production. The rate varies greatly.
Risk factors for hypogonadism include: HIV/AIDS, Previous chemotherapy or radiation therapy, Aging, Obesity, Malnutrition.
Hypogonadism can be inherited. If any of these risk factors are in your family health history, tell your doctor.
The complications of untreated hypogonadism differ depending on when it develops — during fetal development, puberty or adulthood.
Complications might include: Abnormal genitalia, Enlarged male breasts (gynecomastia), Infertility, Erectile dysfunction, Osteoporosis, Poor self-image.
The main sign of male infertility is the inability to conceive a child. There may be no other obvious signs or symptoms. In some cases, however, an underlying problem such as an inherited disorder, a hormonal imbalance, dilated veins around the testicle or a condition that blocks the passage of sperm causes signs and symptoms.
Although most men with male infertility do not notice symptoms other than the inability to conceive a child, signs and symptoms associated with male infertility include: Problems with sexual function — for example, difficulty with ejaculation or small volumes of fluid ejaculated, reduced sexual desire, or difficulty maintaining an erection (erectile dysfunction), Pain, swelling or a lump in the testicle area, Recurrent respiratory infections, Inability to smell, Abnormal breast growth (gynecomastia), Decreased facial or body hair or other signs of a chromosomal or hormonal abnormality, A lower than normal sperm count (fewer than 15 million sperm per milliliter of semen or a total sperm count of less than 39 million per ejaculate).
See a doctor if you have been unable to conceive a child after a year of regular, unprotected intercourse or sooner if you have any of the following: Erection or ejaculation problems, low sex drive, or other problems with sexual function, Pain, discomfort, a lump or swelling in the testicle area, A history of testicle, prostate or sexual problems, A groin, testicle, penis or scrotum surgery.
Male fertility is a complex process. To get your partner pregnant, the following must occur:
You must produce healthy sperm. Initially, this involves the growth and formation of the male reproductive organs during puberty. At least one of your testicles must be functioning correctly, and your body must produce testosterone and other hormones to trigger and maintain sperm production.
Sperm have to be carried into the semen. Once sperm are produced in the testicles, delicate tubes transport them until they mix with semen and are ejaculated out of the penis.
There needs to be enough sperm in the semen. If the number of sperm in your semen (sperm count) is low, it decreases the odds that one of your sperm will fertilize your partner's egg. A low sperm count is fewer than 15 million sperm per milliliter of semen or fewer than 39 million per ejaculate.
Sperm must be functional and able to move. If the movement (motility) or function of your sperm is abnormal, the sperm may not be able to reach or penetrate your partner's egg.
Problems with male fertility can be caused by a number of health issues and medical treatments. Some of these include:
Varicocele. A varicocele is a swelling of the veins that drain the testicle. It's the most common reversible cause of male infertility. Although the exact reason that varicoceles cause infertility is unknown, it may be related to abnormal testicular temperature regulation. Varicoceles result in reduced quality of the sperm.
Treating the varicocele can improve sperm numbers and function, and may potentially improve outcomes when using assisted reproductive techniques such as in vitro fertilization.
Infection. Some infections can interfere with sperm production or sperm health or can cause scarring that blocks the passage of sperm. These include inflammation of the epididymis (epididymitis) or testicles (orchitis) and some sexually transmitted infections, including gonorrhea or HIV. Although some infections can result in permanent testicular damage, most often sperm can still be retrieved.
Ejaculation issues. Retrograde ejaculation occurs when semen enters the bladder during orgasm instead of emerging out the tip of the penis. Various health conditions can cause retrograde ejaculation, including diabetes, spinal injuries, medications, and surgery of the bladder, prostate or urethra.
Some men with spinal cord injuries or certain diseases can't ejaculate semen, even though they still produce sperm. Often in these cases sperm can still be retrieved for use in assisted reproductive techniques.
Antibodies that attack sperm. Anti-sperm antibodies are immune system cells that mistakenly identify sperm as harmful invaders and attempt to eliminate them.
Tumors. Cancers and nonmalignant tumors can affect the male reproductive organs directly, through the glands that release hormones related to reproduction, such as the pituitary gland, or through unknown causes. In some cases, surgery, radiation or chemotherapy to treat tumors can affect male fertility.
Undescended testicles. In some males, during fetal development one or both testicles fail to descend from the abdomen into the sac that normally contains the testicles (scrotum). Decreased fertility is more likely in men who have had this condition.
Hormone imbalances. Infertility can result from disorders of the testicles themselves or an abnormality affecting other hormonal systems including the hypothalamus, pituitary, thyroid and adrenal glands. Low testosterone (male hypogonadism) and other hormonal problems have a number of possible underlying causes.
Defects of tubules that transport sperm. Many different tubes carry sperm. They can be blocked due to various causes, including inadvertent injury from surgery, prior infections, trauma or abnormal development, such as with cystic fibrosis or similar inherited conditions.
Blockage can occur at any level, including within the testicle, in the tubes that drain the testicle, in the epididymis, in the vas deferens, near the ejaculatory ducts or in the urethra.
Chromosome defects. Inherited disorders such as Klinefelter's syndrome — in which a male is born with two X chromosomes and one Y chromosome (instead of one X and one Y) — cause abnormal development of the male reproductive organs. Other genetic syndromes associated with infertility include cystic fibrosis, Kallmann's syndrome and Kartagener's syndrome.
Problems with sexual intercourse. These can include trouble keeping or maintaining an erection sufficient for sex (erectile dysfunction), premature ejaculation, painful intercourse, anatomical abnormalities such as having a urethral opening beneath the penis (hypospadias), or psychological or relationship problems that interfere with sex.
Celiac disease. A digestive disorder caused by sensitivity to gluten, celiac disease can cause male infertility. Fertility may improve after adopting a gluten-free diet.
Certain medications. Testosterone replacement therapy, long-term anabolic steroid use, cancer medications (chemotherapy), certain antifungal medications, some ulcer drugs and certain other medications can impair sperm production and decrease male fertility.
Prior surgeries. Certain surgeries may prevent you from having sperm in your ejaculate, including vasectomy, inguinal hernia repairs, scrotal or testicular surgeries, prostate surgeries, and large abdominal surgeries performed for testicular and rectal cancers, among others. In most cases, surgery can be performed to either reverse these blockage or to retrieve sperm directly from the epididymis and testicles.
Overexposure to certain environmental elements such as heat, toxins and chemicals can reduce sperm production or sperm function. Specific causes include:
Industrial chemicals. Extended exposure to benzenes, toluene, xylene, pesticides, herbicides, organic solvents, painting materials and lead may contribute to low sperm counts.
Heavy metal exposure. Exposure to lead or other heavy metals also may cause infertility.
Radiation or X-rays. Exposure to radiation can reduce sperm production, though it will often eventually return to normal. With high doses of radiation, sperm production can be permanently reduced.
Overheating the testicles. Elevated temperatures impair sperm production and function. Although studies are limited and are inconclusive, frequent use of saunas or hot tubs may temporarily impair your sperm count.
Sitting for long periods, wearing tight clothing or working on a laptop computer for long stretches of time also may increase the temperature in your scrotum and may slightly reduce sperm production.
Some other causes of male infertility include:
Drug use. Anabolic steroids taken to stimulate muscle strength and growth can cause the testicles to shrink and sperm production to decrease. Use of cocaine or marijuana may temporarily reduce the number and quality of your sperm as well.
Alcohol use. Drinking alcohol can lower testosterone levels, cause erectile dysfunction and decrease sperm production. Liver disease caused by excessive drinking also may lead to fertility problems.
Tobacco smoking. Men who smoke may have a lower sperm count than do those who don't smoke. Secondhand smoke also may affect male fertility.
Emotional stress. Stress can interfere with certain hormones needed to produce sperm. Severe or prolonged emotional stress, including problems with fertility, can affect your sperm count.
Depression. Research shows that the likelihood of pregnancy may be lower if a male partner has severe depression. In addition, depression in men may cause sexual dysfunction due to reduced libido, erectile dysfunction, or delayed or inhibited ejaculation.
Weight. Obesity can impair fertility in several ways, including directly impacting sperm themselves as well as by causing hormone changes that reduce male fertility.
Certain occupations including welding or those involving prolonged sitting, such as truck driving, may be associated with a risk of infertility. However, the research to support these links is mixed.
Risk factors linked to male infertility include: Smoking tobacco, Using alcohol, Using certain illicit drugs, Being overweight, Being severely depressed or stressed, Having certain past or present infections, Being exposed to toxins, Overheating the testicles, Having experienced trauma to the testicles, Having a prior vasectomy or major abdominal or pelvic surgery, Having a history of undescended testicles, Being born with a fertility disorder or having a blood relative with a fertility disorder, Having certain medical conditions, including tumors and chronic illnesses, such as sickle cell disease, Taking certain medications or undergoing medical treatments, such as surgery or radiation used for treating cancer.
Infertility can be stressful for both you and your partner. Complications of male infertility can include: Surgery or other procedures to treat an underlying cause of low sperm count or other reproductive problems, Expensive and involved reproductive techniques, Stress and relationship difficulties related to the inability to have a child.
In most cases, no signs or symptoms of susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia exist until you're exposed to certain drugs used for anesthesia.
In rare cases, people at risk of malignant hyperthermia have shown signs of a reaction after intense physical activity during excessive heat or humidity, during a viral illness, or when taking statin medication.
If you're at risk of malignant hyperthermia and you don't have a serious reaction during your first exposure to certain anesthesia drugs, you're still at risk if you receive these drugs in the future. Other anesthesia medications that don't trigger a reaction can be used instead.
Signs and symptoms of malignant hyperthermia may vary and can occur during anesthesia or during recovery shortly after surgery. They can include: Severe muscle rigidity or spasms, Rapid, shallow breathing and problems with low oxygen and high carbon dioxide, Rapid heart rate, Abnormal heart rhythm, Dangerously high body temperature, Excessive sweating, Patchy, irregular skin color (mottled skin).
If someone in your family is known to be at risk of malignant hyperthermia and you need to have anesthesia, it's important to tell your doctor and anesthesia specialist (anesthesiologist). Other drugs may be used instead.
Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS) is caused by a genetic defect (mutation). The abnormal gene increases your risk of malignant hyperthermia when you're exposed to certain anesthesia medications that trigger a reaction. The abnormal gene is most commonly inherited, usually from one parent who also has it. Less often, the abnormal gene is not inherited and is the result of a random gene mutation.
Different genes can cause the disorder. The most commonly affected gene is RYR1. More rarely affected genes include CACNA1S and STAC3.
Your risk of having malignant hyperthermia disorder is higher if someone in your family has it.
If one of your parents has the abnormal gene, you have a 50% chance of having it too (autosomal dominant inheritance pattern).
If you have other relatives with this genetic disorder, your chance of having it is also increased.
Your risk of having malignant hyperthermia is also higher if you or a close relative has: A history of an event that is suspected to be malignant hyperthermia during anesthesia, A history of muscle tissue breakdown called rhabdomyolysis, which can be triggered by exercise in extreme heat and humidity or when taking a statin drug, Certain muscle diseases and disorders caused by inherited abnormal genes.
If not treated promptly, malignant hyperthermia can result in major complications, such as: Muscle injury that breaks down muscle tissue and releases contents into the blood (rhabdomyolysis), Kidney damage or failure, Problems with clotting and bleeding, Death.
Signs and symptoms of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors include: Pain in the affected area, Weakness when trying to move the affected body part, A growing lump of tissue under the skin.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors are rare, so your doctor may investigate more-common causes for your symptoms.
It's not clear what causes most malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Doctors know that these cancers begin when a cell in the protective lining around a nerve develops an error (mutation) in its DNA. The mutation tells the cell to multiply rapidly and to continue living when other cells would normally die. The accumulating cells form a tumor that can grow to invade nearby tissue or spread to other areas of the body.
Factors that increase the risk of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors include:
Previous radiation therapy for cancer. A malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor may develop in the area treated with radiation 10 to 20 years after treatment.
Noncancerous nerve tumors. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors can develop from noncancerous (benign) nerve tumors, such as neurofibroma.
An inherited condition that increases risk of nerve tumors. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors occur more frequently in people with neurofibromatosis 1.
Mammary duct ectasia often doesn't cause any signs or symptoms, but some people experience: A dirty white, greenish or black nipple discharge from one or both nipples, Tenderness in the nipple or surrounding breast tissue (areola), Redness of the nipple and areolar tissue, A breast lump or thickening near the clogged duct, A nipple that's turned inward (inverted).
A bacterial infection called mastitis also may develop in the affected milk duct, causing breast tenderness, inflammation in the area around the nipple (areola) and fever.
Signs and symptoms of mammary duct ectasia may improve on their own.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice changes in your breasts — such as a new breast lump, spontaneous nipple discharge, skin redness or inflammation, or an inverted nipple — that are persistent or that worry you.
Your breasts are made up of connective tissues that include a system of tiny passages that carry milk to the nipples (milk ducts). Mammary duct ectasia occurs when a milk duct beneath the nipple widens. The duct walls may thicken and fill with fluid, becoming blocked or clogged with a sticky substance. Inflammation may result.
Experts don't know exactly what causes mammary duct ectasia. Some speculate the cause to be associated with:
Breast tissue changes due to aging. As you age, the composition of your breast tissue changes from mostly glandular to mostly fatty in a process called involution. These normal breast changes can sometimes lead to a blocked milk duct and the inflammation associated with mammary duct ectasia.
Smoking. Cigarette smoking may be associated with widening of milk ducts, which can lead to inflammation and, possibly, mammary duct ectasia.
Nipple inversion. A newly inverted nipple may obstruct milk ducts, causing inflammation and infection. A nipple that's newly inverted could also be a sign of a more serious underlying condition, such as cancer.
Complications of mammary duct ectasia are usually minor and often more bothersome than serious. These may include:
Nipple discharge. Nipple discharge caused by mammary duct ectasia can be frustrating. Fluid leaking from your nipples can cause embarrassing wetness and staining on your clothes.
Breast discomfort. Mammary duct ectasia can cause redness, swelling and tenderness around your nipples.
Infection. An inflammatory infection (periductal mastitis) may develop in the affected milk duct, sometimes causing pain in or around the nipple, a general feeling of illness or a fever. Persistent redness and worsening pain could be a sign of a bacterial infection and can lead to an abscess — a collection of pus in your breast tissue — which may require a procedure to drain it.
Concern about breast cancer. When you notice a change in your breast, you may worry that it's a sign of breast cancer, especially if you develop a hard lump around the nipple or areola. Having a history of mammary duct ectasia doesn't increase your risk of breast cancer. Still, it's important to see your doctor promptly anytime you notice breast changes.
The signs and symptoms of Marfan syndrome vary greatly, even among members of the same family. Some people experience only mild effects, but others develop life-threatening complications. In most cases, the disease tends to worsen with age.
Marfan syndrome features may include: Tall and slender build, Disproportionately long arms, legs and fingers, A breastbone that protrudes outward or dips inward, A high, arched palate and crowded teeth, Heart murmurs, Extreme nearsightedness, An abnormally curved spine, Flat feet.
If you think that you or your child may have Marfan syndrome, talk to your doctor or pediatrician. If your doctor suspects a problem, you'll likely be referred to a specialist for further evaluation.
Marfan syndrome is caused by a defect in the gene that enables your body to produce a protein that helps give connective tissue its elasticity and strength.
Most people with Marfan syndrome inherit the abnormal gene from a parent who has the disorder. Each child of an affected parent has a 50-50 chance of inheriting the defective gene. In about 25 percent of the people who have Marfan syndrome, the abnormal gene doesn't come from either parent. In these cases, a new mutation develops spontaneously.
Marfan syndrome affects men and women equally and occurs among all races and ethnic groups. Because it's a genetic condition, the greatest risk factor for Marfan syndrome is having a parent with the disorder.
Because Marfan syndrome can affect almost any part of your body, it may cause a wide variety of complications.
The most dangerous complications of Marfan syndrome involve the heart and blood vessels. Faulty connective tissue can weaken the aorta — the large artery that arises from the heart and supplies blood to the body.
Aortic aneurysm. The pressure of blood leaving your heart can cause the wall of your aorta to bulge out, like a weak spot in a tire. In people who have Marfan syndrome, this is most likely to happen at the aortic root — where the artery leaves your heart.
Aortic dissection. The wall of the aorta is made up of layers. Dissection occurs when a small tear in the innermost layer of the aorta's wall allows blood to squeeze in between the inner and outer layers of the wall. This can cause severe pain in the chest or back. An aortic dissection weakens the vessel's structure and can result in a rupture, which may be fatal.
Valve malformations. People who have Marfan syndrome can have weaker tissue than normal in their heart valves. This can produce stretching of the valve tissue and abnormal valve function. When heart valves don't work properly, your heart often has to work harder to compensate. This can eventually lead to heart failure.
Eye complications may include:
Lens dislocation. The focusing lens within your eye can move out of place if its supporting structures weaken. The medical term for this problem is ectopia lentis, and it occurs in more than half the people who have Marfan syndrome.
Retinal problems. Marfan syndrome also increases the risk of a detachment or tear in the retina, the light-sensitive tissue that lines the back wall of your eye.
Early-onset glaucoma or cataracts. People who have Marfan syndrome tend to develop these eye problems at a younger age. Glaucoma causes the pressure within the eye to increase, which can damage the optic nerve. Cataracts are cloudy areas in the eye's normally clear lens.
Marfan syndrome increases the risk of abnormal curves in the spine, such as scoliosis. It can also interfere with the normal development of the ribs, which can cause the breastbone to either protrude or appear sunken into the chest. Foot pain and low back pain are common with Marfan syndrome.
Marfan syndrome can weaken the walls of the aorta, the main artery that leaves the heart. During pregnancy, a woman's heart is pumping more blood than usual, and this can put extra stress on a woman's aorta — which increases the risk of a deadly dissection or rupture.
Signs and symptoms of mastitis can appear suddenly. They may include: Breast tenderness or warmth to the touch, Breast swelling, Thickening of breast tissue, or a breast lump, Pain or a burning sensation continuously or while breast-feeding, Skin redness, often in a wedge-shaped pattern, Generally feeling ill, Fever of 101 F (38.3 C) or greater.
See your doctor if you have breast symptoms that concern you.
Milk that is trapped in the breast is the main cause of mastitis. Other causes include:
A blocked milk duct. If a breast doesn't completely empty at feedings, one of your milk ducts can become clogged. The blockage causes milk to back up, leading to breast infection.
Bacteria entering your breast. Bacteria from your skin's surface and baby's mouth can enter the milk ducts through a crack in the skin of your nipple or through a milk duct opening. Stagnant milk in a breast that isn't emptied provides a breeding ground for the bacteria.
Risk factors for mastitis include: Previous bout of mastitis while breast-feeding, Sore or cracked nipples — although mastitis can develop without broken skin, Wearing a tightfitting bra or putting pressure on your breast when using a seat belt or carrying a heavy bag, which may restrict milk flow, Improper nursing technique, Becoming overly tired or stressed, Poor nutrition, Smoking.
Mastitis that isn't adequately treated or that is due to a blocked duct can cause a collection of pus (abscess) to develop in your breast. An abscess usually requires surgical drainage.
To avoid this complication, talk to your doctor as soon as you develop signs or symptoms of mastitis.
Signs and symptoms of MCAD deficiency typically first appear in babies and young children. In rare cases, the disorder is not diagnosed until adulthood.
Signs and symptoms can vary among people with MCAD deficiency, but they typically include: Vomiting, Lack of energy, Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia).
Hypoglycemia can be triggered by: Going too long without eating or by fasting, Not eating enough complex carbohydrates, Viral infections and other illnesses, Recurrent fever, Vomiting, Diarrhea, Increased exercise, Vaccinations, Significant stress.
Sometimes episodes of hypoglycemia can occur with no symptoms in between these episodes.
In the U.S., all newborn screening programs now test for MCAD deficiency. If you notice signs and symptoms of MCAD deficiency or if you have concerns about your child's health, contact your doctor. After the initial evaluation, you may be referred to a doctor trained in evaluating and treating MCAD deficiency and other health care team members such as a dietitian.
When you don't have enough of the MCAD enzyme in your body, certain fats called medium-chain fatty acids can't be broken down and converted to energy. This results in hypoglycemia and low energy. Also, fatty acids can build up in body tissues and cause damage to the liver and brain.
MCAD deficiency is inherited from both parents. Though both parents are carriers — each one has an abnormal gene — they typically don't have symptoms of the condition. The affected child inherits two copies of the abnormal gene — one from each parent.
If you inherit only one affected gene, you won't develop MCAD deficiency, but you are a carrier and can pass the abnormal gene to your children. But they wouldn't develop the condition unless they also inherited an affected gene from their other parent.
If the hypoglycemia caused by MCAD deficiency is left untreated, it can lead to: Seizures, Breathing problems, Liver problems, Brain damage, Coma, Sudden death.
Measles signs and symptoms appear around 10 to 14 days after exposure to the virus. Signs and symptoms of measles typically include: Fever, Dry cough, Runny nose, Sore throat, Inflamed eyes (conjunctivitis), Tiny white spots with bluish-white centers on a red background found inside the mouth on the inner lining of the cheek — also called Koplik's spots, A skin rash made up of large, flat blotches that often flow into one another.
The infection occurs in a sequence of stages during a period of two to three weeks.
Infection and incubation. For the first 10 to 14 days after you're infected, the measles virus incubates. You have no signs or symptoms of measles during this time.
Nonspecific signs and symptoms. Measles typically begins with a mild to moderate fever, often accompanied by a persistent cough, runny nose, inflamed eyes (conjunctivitis) and sore throat. This relatively mild illness may last two or three days.
Acute illness and rash. The rash consists of small red spots, some of which are slightly raised. Spots and bumps in tight clusters give the skin a splotchy red appearance. The face breaks out first.
Over the next few days, the rash spreads down the arms and trunk, then over the thighs, lower legs and feet. At the same time, the fever rises sharply, often as high as 104 to 105.8 F (40 to 41 C). The measles rash gradually recedes, fading first from the face and last from the thighs and feet.
Communicable period. A person with measles can spread the virus to others for about eight days, starting four days before the rash appears and ending when the rash has been present for four days.
Call your doctor if you think you or your child may have been exposed to measles or if you or your child has a rash resembling measles.
Review your family's vaccination records with your doctor, especially before your children start elementary school or college and before international travel.
Measles is a highly contagious illness caused by a virus that replicates in the nose and throat of an infected child or adult. Then, when someone with measles coughs, sneezes or talks, infected droplets spray into the air, where other people can inhale them.
The infected droplets may also land on a surface, where they remain active and contagious for several hours. You can contract the virus by putting your fingers in your mouth or nose or rubbing your eyes after touching the infected surface.
About 90% of susceptible people who are exposed to someone with the virus will be infected.
Risk factors for measles include:
Being unvaccinated. If you haven't received the vaccine for measles, you're much more likely to develop the disease.
Traveling internationally. If you travel to developing countries, where measles is more common, you're at higher risk of catching the disease.
Having a vitamin A deficiency. If you don't have enough vitamin A in your diet, you're more likely to have more-severe symptoms and complications.
Complications of measles may include:
Ear infection. One of the most common complications of measles is a bacterial ear infection.
Bronchitis, laryngitis or croup. Measles may lead to inflammation of your voice box (larynx) or inflammation of the inner walls that line the main air passageways of your lungs (bronchial tubes).
Pneumonia. Pneumonia is a common complication of measles. People with compromised immune systems can develop an especially dangerous variety of pneumonia that is sometimes fatal.
Encephalitis. About 1 in 1,000 people with measles develops a complication called encephalitis. Encephalitis may occur right after measles, or it might not occur until months later.
Pregnancy problems. If you're pregnant, you need to take special care to avoid measles because the disease can cause preterm labor, low birth weight and maternal death.
Signs and symptoms of medication overuse headaches may differ according to the type of original headache being treated and the medication used.  Medication overuse headaches tend to: Occur every day or nearly every day, often waking you in the early morning, Improve with pain relief medication but then return as your medication wears off.
Other signs and symptoms may include: Nausea, Restlessness, Difficulty concentrating, Memory problems, Irritability.
Occasional headaches are common. But it's important to take your headaches seriously. Some types of headaches can be life-threatening.
Seek immediate medical care if your headache: Is sudden and severe, Accompanies a fever, stiff neck, rash, confusion, seizure, double vision, weakness, numbness or difficulty speaking, Follows a head injury, Gets worse despite rest and pain medication, Is a new type that's persistent, especially in someone older than 50, Occurs with shortness of breath, Happens when you're upright but goes away if you're lying flat.
Consult your doctor if: You usually have two or more headaches a week, You take a pain reliever for your headaches more than twice a week, You need more than the recommended dose of over-the-counter pain remedies to relieve your headaches, Your headache pattern changes.
Doctors don't yet know exactly why medication overuse leads to rebound headaches. The risk of developing medication overuse headaches varies depending on the medication, but any acute headache medication has the potential to lead to medication overuse headaches, including:
Simple pain relievers. Common pain relievers such as aspirin and acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) may contribute to medication overuse headaches — especially if you exceed the recommended daily dosages. Pain relievers such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve) have a low risk of contributing to medication overuse headaches.
Combination pain relievers. Over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers that combine caffeine, aspirin and acetaminophen (Excedrin, others) are common culprits.
This group also includes prescription medications such as Fiorinal, which contains the sedative butalbital. Butalbital-containing compounds have an especially high risk of causing medication overuse headaches, so it's best not to take them to treat headaches.
Migraine medications. Various migraine medications have been linked with medication overuse headaches, including triptans (Imitrex, Zomig, others) and certain ergots — such as ergotamine (Ergomar, others). These medications have a moderate risk of causing medication overuse headaches. The ergot dihydroergotamine (D.H.E. 45) appears to have a lower potential for leading to this problem.
Opiates. Painkillers derived from opium or from synthetic opium compounds include combinations of codeine and acetaminophen (Tylenol with Codeine No. 3 and No. 4, others). These medications have a high risk of causing medication overuse headaches.
Daily doses of caffeine — from coffee, soda, and pain relievers and other products containing this mild stimulant — may fuel medication overuse headaches, as well. Read product labels to make sure you're not wiring your system with more caffeine than you realize.
Risk factors for developing medication overuse headaches include:
History of chronic headaches. A history of chronic headaches, especially migraines, puts you at risk.
Frequent use of headache medications. Your risk increases if you use combination analgesics, ergotamine or triptans 10 or more days a month or simple analgesics more than 15 days a month — especially if this regular use continues for three or more months.
Melanomas can develop anywhere on your body. They most often develop in areas that have had exposure to the sun, such as your back, legs, arms and face.
Melanomas can also occur in areas that don't receive much sun exposure, such as the soles of your feet, palms of your hands and fingernail beds. These hidden melanomas are more common in people with darker skin.
The first melanoma signs and symptoms often are: A change in an existing mole, The development of a new pigmented or unusual-looking growth on your skin.
Melanoma doesn't always begin as a mole. It can also occur on otherwise normal-appearing skin.
Normal moles are generally a uniform color — such as tan, brown or black — with a distinct border separating the mole from your surrounding skin. They're oval or round and usually smaller than 1/4 inch (about 6 millimeters) in diameter — the size of a pencil eraser.
Most moles begin appearing in childhood and new moles may form until about age 40. By the time they are adults, most people have between 10 and 40 moles. Moles may change in appearance over time and some may even disappear with age.
To help you identify characteristics of unusual moles that may indicate melanomas or other skin cancers, think of the letters ABCDE:
A is for asymmetrical shape. Look for moles with irregular shapes, such as two very different-looking halves.
B is for irregular border. Look for moles with irregular, notched or scalloped borders — characteristics of melanomas.
C is for changes in color. Look for growths that have many colors or an uneven distribution of color.
D is for diameter. Look for new growth in a mole larger than 1/4 inch (about 6 millimeters).
E is for evolving. Look for changes over time, such as a mole that grows in size or that changes color or shape. Moles may also evolve to develop new signs and symptoms, such as new itchiness or bleeding.
Cancerous (malignant) moles vary greatly in appearance. Some may show all of the changes listed above, while others may have only one or two unusual characteristics.
Melanomas can also develop in areas of your body that have little or no exposure to the sun, such as the spaces between your toes and on your palms, soles, scalp or genitals. These are sometimes referred to as hidden melanomas because they occur in places most people wouldn't think to check. When melanoma occurs in people with darker skin, it's more likely to occur in a hidden area.
Hidden melanomas include:
Melanoma under a nail. Acral-lentiginous melanoma is a rare form of melanoma that can occur under a fingernail or toenail. It can also be found on the palms of the hands or the soles of the feet. It's more common in people of Asian descent, black people and in others with dark skin pigment.
Melanoma in the mouth, digestive tract, urinary tract or vagina. Mucosal melanoma develops in the mucous membrane that lines the nose, mouth, esophagus, anus, urinary tract and vagina. Mucosal melanomas are especially difficult to detect because they can easily be mistaken for other far more common conditions.
Melanoma in the eye. Eye melanoma, also called ocular melanoma, most often occurs in the uvea — the layer beneath the white of the eye (sclera). An eye melanoma may cause vision changes and may be diagnosed during an eye exam.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice any skin changes that seem unusual.
Melanoma occurs when something goes wrong in the melanin-producing cells (melanocytes) that give color to your skin.
Normally, skin cells develop in a controlled and orderly way — healthy new cells push older cells toward your skin's surface, where they die and eventually fall off. But when some cells develop DNA damage, new cells may begin to grow out of control and can eventually form a mass of cancerous cells.
Just what damages DNA in skin cells and how this leads to melanoma isn't clear. It's likely that a combination of factors, including environmental and genetic factors, causes melanoma. Still, doctors believe exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun and from tanning lamps and beds is the leading cause of melanoma.
UV light doesn't cause all melanomas, especially those that occur in places on your body that don't receive exposure to sunlight. This indicates that other factors may contribute to your risk of melanoma.
Factors that may increase your risk of melanoma include:
Fair skin. Having less pigment (melanin) in your skin means you have less protection from damaging UV radiation. If you have blond or red hair, light-colored eyes, and freckle or sunburn easily, you're more likely to develop melanoma than is someone with a darker complexion. But melanoma can develop in people with darker complexions, including Hispanic people and black people.
A history of sunburn. One or more severe, blistering sunburns can increase your risk of melanoma.
Excessive ultraviolet (UV) light exposure. Exposure to UV radiation, which comes from the sun and from tanning lights and beds, can increase the risk of skin cancer, including melanoma.
Living closer to the equator or at a higher elevation. People living closer to the earth's equator, where the sun's rays are more direct, experience higher amounts of UV radiation than do those living farther north or south. In addition, if you live at a high elevation, you're exposed to more UV radiation.
Having many moles or unusual moles. Having more than 50 ordinary moles on your body indicates an increased risk of melanoma. Also, having an unusual type of mole increases the risk of melanoma. Known medically as dysplastic nevi, these tend to be larger than normal moles and have irregular borders and a mixture of colors.
A family history of melanoma. If a close relative — such as a parent, child or sibling — has had melanoma, you have a greater chance of developing a melanoma, too.
Weakened immune system. People with weakened immune systems have an increased risk of melanoma and other skin cancers. Your immune system may be impaired if you take medicine to suppress the immune system, such as after an organ transplant, or if you have a disease that impairs the immune system, such as AIDS.
Membranous nephropathy may develop gradually, so you may not suspect that anything is wrong. As you lose protein from your blood, swelling in your legs and ankles and weight gain from excess fluid can occur. Many people have lots of swelling from the very beginning of the disease, but others may not have any severe symptoms until they have advanced kidney disease.
Signs and symptoms of membranous nephropathy include: Swelling in the legs and ankles, Weight gain, Fatigue, Poor appetite, Urine that looks foamy, High cholesterol, Increased protein in the urine (proteinuria), Decreased protein in the blood, particularly albumin.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have: Blood in your urine, Swelling in your legs and ankles that doesn't go away, Increased blood pressure, Sudden pain between your upper belly and middle back, Sudden shortness of breath, which could be related to a blood clot complication.
Often, membranous nephropathy results from some type of autoimmune activity. Your body's immune system mistakes healthy tissue as foreign and attacks it with substances called autoantibodies. These autoantibodies target certain proteins located in the kidney's filtering systems (glomeruli). This is known as primary membranous nephropathy.
Sometimes membranous nephropathy is brought on by other causes. When this happens, it's called secondary membranous nephropathy. Causes may include: Autoimmune disease, such as lupus erythematosus, Infection with hepatitis B, hepatitis C or syphilis, Certain medications, such as gold salts and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Solid cancerous tumors or blood cancers.
Membranous nephropathy may also occur along with other kidney diseases, such as diabetic nephropathy and rapidly progressive (crescentic) glomerulonephritis.
Factors that can increase your risk of membranous nephropathy include:
Having a medical condition that can damage your kidneys. Certain diseases and conditions increase your risk of developing membranous nephropathy, such as lupus and other autoimmune diseases.
Use of certain medications. Examples of medications that can cause membranous nephropathy include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and gold salts.
Exposure to certain infections. Examples of infections that increase the risk of membranous nephropathy include hepatitis B, hepatitis C and syphilis.
Genetic background. Certain genetic factors make it more likely that you'll develop membranous nephropathy.
Complications associated with membranous nephropathy include:
High cholesterol. Levels of cholesterol and triglycerides are often high in people with membranous nephropathy, which greatly increases the risk of heart disease.
Blood clots. With proteinuria, you may lose proteins that help prevent clotting from your blood into your urine. This makes you more prone to having blood clots develop in deep veins or blood clots that travel to your lungs.
High blood pressure. Waste buildup in your blood (uremia) and salt retention can raise blood pressure.
Infections. You're more susceptible to infections when proteinuria causes you to lose immune system proteins (antibodies) that protect you from infection.
Nephrotic syndrome. High protein levels in the urine, low protein levels in the blood, high blood cholesterol, and swelling (edema) of the eyelids, feet and abdomen occur with this syndrome.
Acute kidney failure. In cases of severe damage to the kidneys' filtering units (glomeruli), waste products may build up quickly in your blood. You may need emergency dialysis to remove extra fluids and waste from your blood.
Chronic kidney disease. Your kidneys may gradually lose function over time to the point where you need dialysis or a kidney transplant.
Signs and symptoms of Meniere's disease include:
Recurring episodes of vertigo. You have a spinning sensation that starts and stops spontaneously. Episodes of vertigo occur without warning and usually last 20 minutes to several hours, but not more than 24 hours. Severe vertigo can cause nausea.
Hearing loss. Hearing loss in Meniere's disease may come and go, particularly early on. Eventually, most people have some permanent hearing loss.
Ringing in the ear (tinnitus). Tinnitus is the perception of a ringing, buzzing, roaring, whistling or hissing sound in your ear.
Feeling of fullness in the ear. People with Meniere's disease often feel pressure in an affected ear (aural fullness).
After an episode, signs and symptoms improve and might disappear entirely for a while. Over time, the frequency of episodes may lessen.
See your doctor if you have signs or symptoms of Meniere's disease. These problems can be caused by other illnesses, and it's important to get an accurate diagnosis as soon as possible.
The cause of Meniere's disease is unknown. Symptoms of Meniere's disease appear to be the result of an abnormal amount of fluid (endolymph) in the inner ear, but it isn't clear what causes that to happen.
Factors that affect the fluid, which might contribute to Meniere's disease, include: Improper fluid drainage, perhaps because of a blockage or anatomic abnormality, Abnormal immune response, Viral infection, Genetic predisposition.
Because no single cause has been identified, it's likely that Meniere's disease results from a combination of factors.
The unpredictable episodes of vertigo and the prospect of permanent hearing loss can be the most difficult problems of Meniere's disease. The disease can unexpectedly interrupt your life, causing fatigue and stress.
Vertigo can cause you to lose balance, increasing your risk of falls and accidents.
Signs and symptoms of a meningioma typically begin gradually and may be very subtle at first. Depending on where in the brain or, rarely, spine the tumor is situated, signs and symptoms may include: Changes in vision, such as seeing double or blurriness, Headaches, especially those that are worse in the morning, Hearing loss or ringing in the ears, Memory loss, Loss of smell, Seizures, Weakness in your arms or legs, Language difficulty.
Most signs and symptoms of a meningioma evolve slowly, but sometimes a meningioma requires emergency care.
Seek emergency care if you have: Sudden onset of seizures, Sudden changes in your vision or memory.
Make an appointment to see your doctor if you have persistent signs and symptoms that concern you, such as headaches that worsen over time.
In many cases, because meningiomas do not cause any noticeable signs or symptoms, they are only discovered as a result of imaging scans done for reasons that turn out to be unrelated to the tumor, such as a head injury, stroke or headaches.
It isn't clear what causes a meningioma. Doctors know that something alters some cells in your meninges to make them multiply out of control, leading to a meningioma tumor.
Whether this occurs because of genes you inherit, hormones (which may be related to the more frequent occurrence in women), the rare instance of prior exposure to radiation or other factors remains largely unknown. There is no solid evidence to support the assertion that meningiomas occur in association with cellphone use.
Risk factors for a meningioma include:
Radiation treatment. Radiation therapy that involves radiation to the head may increase the risk of a meningioma.
Female hormones. Meningiomas are more common in women, leading doctors to believe that female hormones may play a role. Some studies have also suggested a link between breast cancer and meningioma risk related to the role of hormones.
An inherited nervous system disorder. The rare disorder neurofibromatosis 2 increases the risk of meningioma and other brain tumors.
Obesity. A high body mass index (BMI) is an established risk factor for many types of cancers, and a higher prevalence of meningiomas among obese people has been observed in several large studies. But the relationship between obesity and meningiomas is not clear.
A meningioma and its treatment, typically surgery and radiation therapy, can cause long-term complications, including: Difficulty concentrating, Memory loss, Personality changes, Seizures, Weakness, Sensory changes, Language difficulty.
Your doctor can treat some complications and refer you to specialists to help you cope with other complications.
Early meningitis symptoms may mimic the flu (influenza). Symptoms may develop over several hours or over a few days.
Possible signs and symptoms in anyone older than the age of 2 include: Sudden high fever, Stiff neck, Severe headache that seems different from normal, Headache with nausea or vomiting, Confusion or difficulty concentrating, Seizures, Sleepiness or difficulty waking, Sensitivity to light, No appetite or thirst, Skin rash (sometimes, such as in meningococcal meningitis).
Newborns and infants may show these signs: High fever, Constant crying, Excessive sleepiness or irritability, Difficulty waking from sleep, Inactivity or sluggishness, Not waking to eat, Poor feeding, Vomiting, A bulge in the soft spot on top of a baby's head (fontanel), Stiffness in the body and neck.
Infants with meningitis may be difficult to comfort, and may even cry harder when held.
Seek immediate medical care if you or someone in your family has meningitis signs or symptoms, such as: Fever, Severe, unrelenting headache, Confusion, Vomiting, Stiff neck.
Bacterial meningitis is serious and can be fatal within days without prompt antibiotic treatment. Delayed treatment increases the risk of permanent brain damage or death.
It's also important to talk to your doctor if a family member or someone you live or work with has meningitis. You may need to take medications to prevent getting the infection.
Viral infections are the most common cause of meningitis, followed by bacterial infections and, rarely, fungal and parasitic infections. Because bacterial infections can be life-threatening, identifying the cause is essential.
Bacteria that enter the bloodstream and travel to the brain and spinal cord cause acute bacterial meningitis. But it can also occur when bacteria directly invade the meninges. This may be caused by an ear or sinus infection, a skull fracture, or — rarely — some surgeries.
Several strains of bacteria can cause acute bacterial meningitis, most commonly:
Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus). This bacterium is the most common cause of bacterial meningitis in infants, young children and adults in the United States. It more commonly causes pneumonia or ear or sinus infections. A vaccine can help prevent this infection.
Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus). This bacterium is another leading cause of bacterial meningitis. These bacteria commonly cause an upper respiratory infection but can cause meningococcal meningitis when they enter the bloodstream. This is a highly contagious infection that affects mainly teenagers and young adults. It may cause local epidemics in college dormitories, boarding schools and military bases. A vaccine can help prevent infection. Even if vaccinated, anybody who has been in close contact with a person with meningococcal meningitis should receive an oral antibiotic to prevent the disease.
Haemophilus influenzae (haemophilus). Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) bacterium was once the leading cause of bacterial meningitis in children. But new Hib vaccines have greatly reduced the number of cases of this type of meningitis.
Listeria monocytogenes (listeria). These bacteria can be found in unpasteurized cheeses, hot dogs and lunchmeats. Pregnant women, newborns, older adults and people with weakened immune systems are most susceptible. Listeria can cross the placental barrier, and infections in late pregnancy may be fatal to the baby.
Viral meningitis is usually mild and often clears on its own. Most cases in the United States are caused by a group of viruses known as enteroviruses, which are most common in late summer and early fall. Viruses such as herpes simplex virus, HIV, mumps virus, West Nile virus and others also can cause viral meningitis.
Slow-growing organisms (such as fungi and Mycobacterium tuberculosis) that invade the membranes and fluid surrounding your brain cause chronic meningitis. Chronic meningitis develops over two weeks or more. The signs and symptoms of chronic meningitis — headache, fever, vomiting and mental cloudiness — are similar to those of acute meningitis.
Fungal meningitis is relatively uncommon in the United States. It may mimic acute bacterial meningitis. It's often contracted by breathing in fungal spores that may be found in soil, decaying wood and bird droppings. Fungal meningitis isn't contagious from person to person. Cryptococcal meningitis is a common fungal form of the disease that affects people with immune deficiencies, such as AIDS. It's life-threatening if not treated with an antifungal medication. Even with treatment, fungal meningitis may recur.
Parasites can cause a rare type of meningitis called eosinophilic meningitis. Parasitic meningitis can also be caused by a tapeworm infection in the brain (cysticercosis) or cerebral malaria. Amoebic meningitis is a rare type that is sometimes contracted through swimming in fresh water and can quickly become life-threatening. The main parasites that cause meningitis typically infect animals. People are usually infected by eating foods contaminated with these parasites. Parasitic meningitis isn't spread between people.
Meningitis can also result from noninfectious causes, such as chemical reactions, drug allergies, some types of cancer and inflammatory diseases such as sarcoidosis.
Risk factors for meningitis include:
Skipping vaccinations. Risk rises for anyone who hasn't completed the recommended childhood or adult vaccination schedule.
Age. Most cases of viral meningitis occur in children younger than age 5. Bacterial meningitis is common in those under age 20.
Living in a community setting. College students living in dormitories, personnel on military bases, and children in boarding schools and child care facilities are at greater risk of meningococcal meningitis. This is probably because the bacterium is spread through the respiratory route, and spreads quickly through large groups.
Pregnancy. Pregnancy increases the risk of listeriosis — an infection caused by listeria bacteria, which may also cause meningitis. Listeriosis increases the risk of miscarriage, stillbirth and premature delivery.
Compromised immune system. AIDS, alcoholism, diabetes, use of immunosuppressant drugs and other factors that affect your immune system also make you more susceptible to meningitis. Having your spleen removed also increases your risk, and anyone without a spleen should get vaccinated to minimize that risk.
Meningitis complications can be severe. The longer you or your child has the disease without treatment, the greater the risk of seizures and permanent neurological damage, including: Hearing loss, Memory difficulty, Learning disabilities, Brain damage, Gait problems, Seizures, Kidney failure, Shock, Death.
With prompt treatment, even people with severe meningitis can have good recovery.
In the months or years leading up to menopause (perimenopause), you might experience these signs and symptoms: Irregular periods, Vaginal dryness, Hot flashes, Chills, Night sweats, Sleep problems, Mood changes, Weight gain and slowed metabolism, Thinning hair and dry skin, Loss of breast fullness.
Signs and symptoms, including changes in menstruation can vary among women. Most likely, you'll experience some irregularity in your periods before they end.
Skipping periods during perimenopause is common and expected. Often, menstrual periods will skip a month and return, or skip several months and then start monthly cycles again for a few months. Periods also tend to happen on shorter cycles, so they are closer together. Despite irregular periods, pregnancy is possible. If you've skipped a period but aren't sure you've started the menopausal transition, consider a pregnancy test.
Keep up with regular visits with your doctor for preventive health care and any medical concerns. Continue getting these appointments during and after menopause.
Preventive health care as you age may include recommended health screening tests, such as colonoscopy, mammography and triglyceride screening. Your doctor might recommend other tests and exams, too, including thyroid testing if suggested by your history, and breast and pelvic exams.
Always seek medical advice if you have bleeding from your vagina after menopause.
Menopause can result from:
Naturally declining reproductive hormones. As you approach your late 30s, your ovaries start making less estrogen and progesterone — the hormones that regulate menstruation — and your fertility declines.
In your 40s, your menstrual periods may become longer or shorter, heavier or lighter, and more or less frequent, until eventually — on average, by age 51 — your ovaries stop releasing eggs, and you have no more periods.
Surgery that removes the ovaries (oophorectomy). Your ovaries produce hormones, including estrogen and progesterone, that regulate the menstrual cycle. Surgery to remove your ovaries causes immediate menopause. Your periods stop, and you're likely to have hot flashes and experience other menopausal signs and symptoms. Signs and symptoms can be severe, as hormonal changes occur abruptly rather than gradually over several years.
Surgery that removes your uterus but not your ovaries (hysterectomy) usually doesn't cause immediate menopause. Although you no longer have periods, your ovaries still release eggs and produce estrogen and progesterone.
Chemotherapy and radiation therapy. These cancer therapies can induce menopause, causing symptoms such as hot flashes during or shortly after the course of treatment. The halt to menstruation (and fertility) is not always permanent following chemotherapy, so birth control measures may still be desired. Radiation therapy only affects ovarian function if radiation is directed at the ovaries. Radiation therapy to other parts of the body, such as breast tissue or the head and neck, won't affect menopause.
Primary ovarian insufficiency. About 1% of women experience menopause before age 40 (premature menopause). Premature menopause may result from the failure of your ovaries to produce normal levels of reproductive hormones (primary ovarian insufficiency), which can stem from genetic factors or autoimmune disease. But often no cause of premature menopause can be found. For these women, hormone therapy is typically recommended at least until the natural age of menopause in order to protect the brain, heart and bones.
After menopause, your risk of certain medical conditions increases. Examples include:
Heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease. When your estrogen levels decline, your risk of cardiovascular disease increases. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in women as well as in men. So it's important to get regular exercise, eat a healthy diet and maintain a normal weight. Ask your doctor for advice on how to protect your heart, such as how to reduce your cholesterol or blood pressure if it's too high.
Osteoporosis. This condition causes bones to become brittle and weak, leading to an increased risk of fractures. During the first few years after menopause, you may lose bone density at a rapid rate, increasing your risk of osteoporosis. Postmenopausal women with osteoporosis are especially susceptible to fractures of their spine, hips and wrists.
Urinary incontinence. As the tissues of your vagina and urethra lose elasticity, you may experience frequent, sudden, strong urges to urinate, followed by an involuntary loss of urine (urge incontinence), or the loss of urine with coughing, laughing or lifting (stress incontinence). You may have urinary tract infections more often.
Strengthening pelvic floor muscles with Kegel exercises and using a topical vaginal estrogen may help relieve symptoms of incontinence. Hormone therapy may also be an effective treatment option for menopausal urinary tract and vaginal changes that can result in urinary incontinence.
Sexual function. Vaginal dryness from decreased moisture production and loss of elasticity can cause discomfort and slight bleeding during sexual intercourse. Also, decreased sensation may reduce your desire for sexual activity (libido).
Water-based vaginal moisturizers and lubricants may help. If a vaginal lubricant isn't enough, many women benefit from the use of local vaginal estrogen treatment, available as a vaginal cream, tablet or ring.
Weight gain. Many women gain weight during the menopausal transition and after menopause because metabolism slows. You may need to eat less and exercise more, just to maintain your current weight.
Signs and symptoms of menorrhagia may include: Soaking through one or more sanitary pads or tampons every hour for several consecutive hours, Needing to use double sanitary protection to control your menstrual flow, Needing to wake up to change sanitary protection during the night, Bleeding for longer than a week, Passing blood clots larger than a quarter, Restricting daily activities due to heavy menstrual flow, Symptoms of anemia, such as tiredness, fatigue or shortness of breath.
Seek medical help before your next scheduled exam if you experience: Vaginal bleeding so heavy it soaks at least one pad or tampon an hour for more than two hours, Bleeding between periods or irregular vaginal bleeding, Any vaginal bleeding after menopause.
In some cases, the cause of heavy menstrual bleeding is unknown, but a number of conditions may cause menorrhagia. Common causes include:
Hormone imbalance. In a normal menstrual cycle, a balance between the hormones estrogen and progesterone regulates the buildup of the lining of the uterus (endometrium), which is shed during menstruation. If a hormone imbalance occurs, the endometrium develops in excess and eventually sheds by way of heavy menstrual bleeding.
A number of conditions can cause hormone imbalances, including polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), obesity, insulin resistance and thyroid problems.
Dysfunction of the ovaries. If your ovaries don't release an egg (ovulate) during a menstrual cycle (anovulation), your body doesn't produce the hormone progesterone, as it would during a normal menstrual cycle. This leads to hormone imbalance and may result in menorrhagia.
Uterine fibroids. These noncancerous (benign) tumors of the uterus appear during your childbearing years. Uterine fibroids may cause heavier than normal or prolonged menstrual bleeding.
Polyps. Small, benign growths on the lining of the uterus (uterine polyps) may cause heavy or prolonged menstrual bleeding.
Adenomyosis. This condition occurs when glands from the endometrium become embedded in the uterine muscle, often causing heavy bleeding and painful periods.
Intrauterine device (IUD). Menorrhagia is a well-known side effect of using a nonhormonal intrauterine device for birth control. Your doctor will help you plan for alternative management options.
Pregnancy complications. A single, heavy, late period may be due to a miscarriage. Another cause of heavy bleeding during pregnancy includes an unusual location of the placenta, such as a low-lying placenta or placenta previa.
Cancer. Uterine cancer and cervical cancer can cause excessive menstrual bleeding, especially if you are postmenopausal or have had an abnormal Pap test in the past.
Inherited bleeding disorders. Some bleeding disorders — such as von Willebrand's disease, a condition in which an important blood-clotting factor is deficient or impaired — can cause abnormal menstrual bleeding.
Medications. Certain medications, including anti-inflammatory medications, hormonal medications such as estrogen and progestins, and anticoagulants such as warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven) or enoxaparin (Lovenox), can contribute to heavy or prolonged menstrual bleeding.
Other medical conditions. A number of other medical conditions, including liver or kidney disease, may be associated with menorrhagia.
Risk factors vary with age and whether you have other medical conditions that may explain your menorrhagia. In a normal cycle, the release of an egg from the ovaries stimulates the body's production of progesterone, the female hormone most responsible for keeping periods regular. When no egg is released, insufficient progesterone can cause heavy menstrual bleeding.
Menorrhagia in adolescent girls is typically due to anovulation. Adolescent girls are especially prone to anovulatory cycles in the first year after their first menstrual period (menarche).
Menorrhagia in older reproductive-age women is typically due to uterine pathology, including fibroids, polyps and adenomyosis. However, other problems, such as uterine cancer, bleeding disorders, medication side effects and liver or kidney disease could be contributing factors.
Excessive or prolonged menstrual bleeding can lead to other medical conditions, including:
Anemia. Menorrhagia can cause blood loss anemia by reducing the number of circulating red blood cells. The number of circulating red blood cells is measured by hemoglobin, a protein that enables red blood cells to carry oxygen to tissues.
Iron deficiency anemia occurs as your body attempts to make up for the lost red blood cells by using your iron stores to make more hemoglobin, which can then carry oxygen on red blood cells. Menorrhagia may decrease iron levels enough to increase the risk of iron deficiency anemia.
Signs and symptoms include pale skin, weakness and fatigue. Although diet plays a role in iron deficiency anemia, the problem is complicated by heavy menstrual periods.
Severe pain. Along with heavy menstrual bleeding, you might have painful menstrual cramps (dysmenorrhea). Sometimes the cramps associated with menorrhagia are severe enough to require medical evaluation.
Symptoms of menstrual cramps include: Throbbing or cramping pain in your lower abdomen that can be intense, Pain that starts 1 to 3 days before your period, peaks 24 hours after the onset of your period and subsides in 2 to 3 days, Dull, continuous ache, Pain that radiates to your lower back and thighs.
Some women also have: Nausea, Loose stools, Headache, Dizziness.
See your doctor if: Menstrual cramps disrupt your life every month, Your symptoms progressively worsen, You just started having severe menstrual cramps after age 25.
During your menstrual period, your uterus contracts to help expel its lining. Hormonelike substances (prostaglandins) involved in pain and inflammation trigger the uterine muscle contractions. Higher levels of prostaglandins are associated with more-severe menstrual cramps.
Menstrual cramps can be caused by:
Endometriosis. The tissue that lines your uterus becomes implanted outside your uterus, most commonly on your fallopian tubes, ovaries or the tissue lining your pelvis.
Uterine fibroids. These noncancerous growths in the wall of the uterus can cause pain.
Adenomyosis. The tissue that lines your uterus begins to grow into the muscular walls of the uterus.
Pelvic inflammatory disease. This infection of the female reproductive organs is usually caused by sexually transmitted bacteria.
Cervical stenosis. In some women, the opening of the cervix is small enough to impede menstrual flow, causing a painful increase of pressure within the uterus.
You might be at risk of menstrual cramps if: You're younger than age 30, You started puberty early, at age 11 or younger, You bleed heavily during periods (menorrhagia), You have irregular menstrual bleeding (metrorrhagia), You have a family history of menstrual cramps (dysmenorrhea), You smoke.
Menstrual cramps don't cause other medical complications, but they can interfere with school, work and social activities.
Certain conditions associated with menstrual cramps can have complications, though. For example, endometriosis can cause fertility problems. Pelvic inflammatory disease can scar your fallopian tubes, increasing the risk of a fertilized egg implanting outside of your uterus (ectopic pregnancy).
Signs and symptoms of mental illness can vary, depending on the disorder, circumstances and other factors. Mental illness symptoms can affect emotions, thoughts and behaviors.
Examples of signs and symptoms include: Feeling sad or down, Confused thinking or reduced ability to concentrate, Excessive fears or worries, or extreme feelings of guilt, Extreme mood changes of highs and lows, Withdrawal from friends and activities, Significant tiredness, low energy or problems sleeping, Detachment from reality (delusions), paranoia or hallucinations, Inability to cope with daily problems or stress, Trouble understanding and relating to situations and to people, Problems with alcohol or drug use, Major changes in eating habits, Sex drive changes, Excessive anger, hostility or violence, Suicidal thinking.
Sometimes symptoms of a mental health disorder appear as physical problems, such as stomach pain, back pain, headaches, or other unexplained aches and pains.
If you have any signs or symptoms of a mental illness, see your primary care provider or a mental health professional. Most mental illnesses don't improve on their own, and if untreated, a mental illness may get worse over time and cause serious problems.
Suicidal thoughts and behavior are common with some mental illnesses. If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, get help right away:
Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
Call your mental health specialist.
Call a suicide hotline number. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) or use its webchat on suicidepreventionlifeline.org/chat.
Seek help from your primary care provider.
Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.
Suicidal thinking doesn't get better on its own — so get help.
If your loved one shows signs of mental illness, have an open and honest discussion with him or her about your concerns. You may not be able to force someone to get professional care, but you can offer encouragement and support. You can also help your loved one find a qualified mental health professional and make an appointment. You may even be able to go along to the appointment.
If your loved one has done self-harm or is considering doing so, take the person to the hospital or call for emergency help.
Mental illnesses, in general, are thought to be caused by a variety of genetic and environmental factors:
Inherited traits. Mental illness is more common in people whose blood relatives also have a mental illness. Certain genes may increase your risk of developing a mental illness, and your life situation may trigger it.
Environmental exposures before birth. Exposure to environmental stressors, inflammatory conditions, toxins, alcohol or drugs while in the womb can sometimes be linked to mental illness.
Brain chemistry. Neurotransmitters are naturally occurring brain chemicals that carry signals to other parts of your brain and body. When the neural networks involving these chemicals are impaired, the function of nerve receptors and nerve systems change, leading to depression and other emotional disorders.
Certain factors may increase your risk of developing a mental illness, including: A history of mental illness in a blood relative, such as a parent or sibling, Stressful life situations, such as financial problems, a loved one's death or a divorce, An ongoing (chronic) medical condition, such as diabetes, Brain damage as a result of a serious injury (traumatic brain injury), such as a violent blow to the head, Traumatic experiences, such as military combat or assault, Use of alcohol or recreational drugs, A childhood history of abuse or neglect, Few friends or few healthy relationships, A previous mental illness.
Mental illness is common. About 1 in 5 adults has a mental illness in any given year. Mental illness can begin at any age, from childhood through later adult years, but most cases begin earlier in life.
The effects of mental illness can be temporary or long lasting. You also can have more than one mental health disorder at the same time. For example, you may have depression and a substance use disorder.
Mental illness is a leading cause of disability. Untreated mental illness can cause severe emotional, behavioral and physical health problems. Complications sometimes linked to mental illness include: Unhappiness and decreased enjoyment of life, Family conflicts, Relationship difficulties, Social isolation, Problems with tobacco, alcohol and other drugs, Missed work or school, or other problems related to work or school, Legal and financial problems, Poverty and homelessness, Self-harm and harm to others, including suicide or homicide, Weakened immune system, so your body has a hard time resisting infections, Heart disease and other medical conditions.
Pressure on the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, which supplies sensation to your upper thigh, might cause these symptoms of meralgia paresthetica: Tingling and numbness in the outer (lateral) part of your thigh, Burning pain on the surface of the outer part of your thigh.
These symptoms commonly occur on one side of your body and might intensify after walking or standing.
See your doctor if you have symptoms of meralgia paresthetica.
Meralgia paresthetica occurs when the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve — which supplies sensation to the surface of your outer thigh — becomes compressed, or pinched. The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve is purely a sensory nerve and doesn't affect your ability to use your leg muscles.
In most people, this nerve passes through the groin to the upper thigh without trouble. But in meralgia paresthetica, the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve becomes trapped — often under the inguinal ligament, which runs along your groin from your abdomen to your upper thigh.
Common causes of this compression include any condition that increases pressure on the groin, including: Tight clothing, such as belts, corsets and tight pants, Obesity or weight gain, Wearing a heavy tool belt, Pregnancy, Scar tissue near the inguinal ligament due to injury or past surgery.
Nerve injury, which can be due to diabetes or seat belt injury after a motor vehicle accident, for example, also can cause meralgia paresthetica.
The following might increase your risk of meralgia paresthetica:
Extra weight. Being overweight or obese can increase the pressure on your lateral femoral cutaneous nerve.
Pregnancy. A growing belly puts added pressure on your groin, through which the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve passes.
Diabetes. Diabetes-related nerve injury can lead to meralgia paresthetica.
Age. People between the ages of 30 and 60 are at a higher risk.
The first sign of Merkel cell carcinoma is usually a fast-growing, painless nodule (tumor) on your skin. The nodule may be skin-colored or may appear in shades of red, blue or purple. Most Merkel cell carcinomas appear on the face, head or neck, but they can develop anywhere on your body, even on areas not exposed to sunlight.
If you notice a mole, freckle or bump that is changing in size, shape or color, growing rapidly, or bleeding easily after minor trauma, such as washing your skin or shaving, make an appointment with your doctor.
It's not clear what causes Merkel cell carcinoma. Merkel cell carcinoma begins in the Merkel cells. Merkel cells are found at the base of the outermost layer of your skin (epidermis). Merkel cells are connected to the nerve endings in the skin that are responsible for the sense of touch.
Researchers recently discovered that a common virus plays a role in causing most cases of Merkel cell carcinoma. The virus (Merkel cell polyomavirus) lives on the skin and doesn't cause any signs or symptoms. Just how this virus causes Merkel cell carcinoma has yet to be determined. Given that the virus is very common and Merkel cell carcinoma is very rare, it's likely that other risk factors play a role in the development of this cancer.
Factors that may increase your risk of Merkel cell carcinoma include:
Excessive exposure to natural or artificial sunlight. Being exposed to ultraviolet light, such as the light that comes from the sun or from tanning beds, increases your risk of Merkel cell carcinoma. The majority of Merkel cell carcinomas appear on skin surfaces frequently exposed to sun.
A weakened immune system. People with weakened immune systems — including those with HIV infection, those taking drugs that suppress the immune response or those with chronic leukemias — are more likely to develop Merkel cell carcinoma.
History of other skin cancers. Merkel cell carcinoma is associated with the development of other skin cancers, such as basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma.
Older age. Your risk of Merkel cell carcinoma increases as you age. This cancer is most common in people older than age 50, though it can occur at any age.
Light skin color. Merkel cell carcinoma usually arises in people who have light-colored skin. Whites are much more likely to be affected by this skin cancer than are blacks.
Even with treatment, Merkel cell carcinoma commonly spreads (metastasizes) beyond the skin. Merkel cell carcinoma tends to travel first to nearby lymph nodes. Later it may spread to your brain, bones, liver or lungs, where it can interfere with the functioning of these organs. Cancer that has metastasized is more difficult to treat and can be fatal.
Signs and symptoms of the acute form of mesenteric ischemia include: Abrupt, severe abdominal pain, Urgent need to have a bowel movement, Fever, Nausea and vomiting.
Signs and symptoms of the chronic form of mesenteric ischemia include: Abdominal pain that starts about 30 minutes after eating, Pain that worsens over an hour, Pain that goes away within one to three hours.
If you have severe, abrupt abdominal pain that persists, seek emergency medical care. If you develop pain after eating, make an appointment with your doctor.
Both acute and chronic mesenteric ischemia are caused by a decrease in blood flow to the small intestine. Acute mesenteric ischemia is most commonly caused by a blood clot in the main mesenteric artery. The blood clot often originates in the heart. The chronic form is most commonly caused by a buildup of plaque that narrows the arteries.
If not treated promptly, acute mesenteric ischemia can lead to:
Sepsis. This potentially life-threatening condition is caused by the body releasing chemicals into the bloodstream to fight infection. In sepsis, the body overreacts to the chemicals, triggering changes that can lead to multiple organ failure.
Irreversible bowel damage. Insufficient blood flow to the bowel can cause parts of the bowel to die.
Death. Both of the above complications can lead to death.
People with chronic mesenteric ischemia can develop:
Fear of eating. This occurs because of the after-meal pain associated with the condition.
Unintentional weight loss. This can occur as a result of the fear of eating.
Acute-on-chronic mesenteric ischemia. Symptoms of chronic mesenteric ischemia can progress, leading to the acute form of the condition.
Possible signs and symptoms of mesenteric lymphadenitis include: Abdominal pain, often centered on the lower right side, but the pain can be more widespread, General abdominal tenderness, Fever, Mesenteric lymph node enlargement.
Depending on what's causing the ailment, signs and symptoms might also include: Diarrhea, Nausea and vomiting.
Abdominal pain is common in children and teens, and it can be hard to know when it requires medical attention.
Call your doctor right away if your child has episodes of: Sudden, severe abdominal pain, Abdominal pain with fever, Abdominal pain with diarrhea or vomiting.
In addition, call your doctor if your child has episodes of the following signs and symptoms that don't get better over a short time: Abdominal pain with a change in bowel habits, Abdominal pain with loss of appetite, Abdominal pain that interferes with sleep.
The most common cause of mesenteric lymphadenitis is a viral infection, such as gastroenteritis — often called stomach flu. This infection causes inflammation in the lymph nodes in the thin tissue that attaches your intestine to the back of your abdominal wall (mesentery).
Other causes of mesenteric lymphadenitis include bacterial infection, inflammatory bowel disease and lymphoma.
Signs and symptoms of mesothelioma vary depending on where the cancer occurs.
Pleural mesothelioma, which affects the tissue that surrounds the lungs, causes signs and symptoms that may include: Chest pain, Painful coughing, Shortness of breath, Unusual lumps of tissue under the skin on your chest, Unexplained weight loss.
Peritoneal mesothelioma, which occurs in tissue in the abdomen, causes signs and symptoms that may include: Abdominal pain, Abdominal swelling, Nausea, Unexplained weight loss.
Signs and symptoms of other types of mesothelioma are unclear, since these forms of the disease are very rare.
Pericardial mesothelioma, which affects tissue that surrounds the heart, can cause signs and symptoms such as breathing difficulty and chest pains.
Mesothelioma of tunica vaginalis, which affects tissue surrounding the testicles, may be first detected as swelling or a mass on a testicle.
See your doctor if you have signs and symptoms that worry you. Signs and symptoms of mesothelioma aren't specific to this disease and, due to the rarity of mesothelioma, are more likely to be related to other conditions. If any persistent signs and symptoms seem unusual or bothersome, ask your doctor to evaluate them. Tell your doctor if you've been exposed to asbestos.
In general, cancer begins when a series of changes (mutations) happens in a cell's DNA. The DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The mutations tell the cell to grow and multiply out of control. The abnormal cells accumulate and form a tumor.
It isn't clear what causes the initial genetic mutations that lead to mesothelioma, though researchers have identified factors that may increase the risk. It's likely that cancers form because of an interaction between many factors, such as inherited conditions, your environment, your health conditions and your lifestyle choices.
Most mesotheliomas are thought to be related to asbestos exposure. Asbestos is a mineral that's found naturally in the environment. Asbestos fibers are strong and resistant to heat, making them useful in a wide variety of applications, such as in insulation, brakes, shingles, flooring and many other products.
When asbestos is broken up, such as during the mining process or when removing asbestos insulation, dust may be created. If the dust is inhaled or swallowed, the asbestos fibers will settle in the lungs or in the stomach, where they can cause irritation that may lead to mesothelioma. Exactly how this happens isn't understood. It can take 20 to 60 years or more for mesothelioma to develop after asbestos exposure.
Most people with asbestos exposure never develop mesothelioma. This indicates that other factors may be involved in determining whether someone gets mesothelioma. For instance, you could inherit a predisposition to cancer or some other condition could increase your risk.
Factors that may increase the risk of mesothelioma include:
Personal history of asbestos exposure. If you've been directly exposed to asbestos fibers at work or at home, your risk of mesothelioma is greatly increased.
Living with someone who works with asbestos. People who are exposed to asbestos may carry the fibers home on their skin and clothing. Exposure to these stray fibers over many years can put others in the home at risk of mesothelioma. People who work with high levels of asbestos can reduce the risk of bringing home asbestos fibers by showering and changing clothes before leaving work.
A family history of mesothelioma. If your parent, sibling or child has mesothelioma, you may have an increased risk of this disease.
Radiation therapy to the chest. If you had radiation therapy for cancer in your chest, you might have an increased risk of mesothelioma.
As pleural mesothelioma spreads in the chest, it puts pressure on the structures in that area. This can cause complications, such as: Difficulty breathing, Chest pain, Difficulty swallowing, Pain caused by pressure on the nerves and spinal cord, Accumulation of fluid in the chest (pleural effusion), which can compress the lung nearby and make breathing difficult.
Most of the disorders associated with metabolic syndrome don't have obvious signs or symptoms. One sign that is visible is a large waist circumference. And if your blood sugar is high, you might notice the signs and symptoms of diabetes — such as increased thirst and urination, fatigue, and blurred vision.
If you know you have at least one component of metabolic syndrome, ask your doctor whether you need testing for other components of the syndrome.
Metabolic syndrome is closely linked to overweight or obesity and inactivity.
It's also linked to a condition called insulin resistance. Normally, your digestive system breaks down the foods you eat into sugar. Insulin is a hormone made by your pancreas that helps sugar enter your cells to be used as fuel.
In people with insulin resistance, cells don't respond normally to insulin and glucose can't enter the cells as easily. As a result, your blood sugar levels rise even as your body churns out more and more insulin to try to lower your blood sugar.
The following factors increase your chances of having metabolic syndrome:
Age. Your risk of metabolic syndrome increases with age.
Ethnicity. In the United States, Hispanics— especially Hispanic women — appear to be at the greatest risk of developing metabolic syndrome.
Obesity. Carrying too much weight, especially in your abdomen, increases your risk of metabolic syndrome.
Diabetes. You're more likely to have metabolic syndrome if you had diabetes during pregnancy (gestational diabetes) or if you have a family history of type 2 diabetes.
Other diseases. Your risk of metabolic syndrome is higher if you've ever had nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, polycystic ovary syndrome or sleep apnea.
Having metabolic syndrome can increase your risk of developing:
Type 2 diabetes. If you don't make lifestyle changes to control your excess weight, you may develop insulin resistance, which can cause your blood sugar levels to rise. Eventually, insulin resistance can lead to type 2 diabetes.
Heart and blood vessel disease. High cholesterol and high blood pressure can contribute to the buildup of plaques in your arteries. These plaques can narrow and harden your arteries, which can lead to a heart attack or stroke.
Damage to the protective myelin covering the nerves results in progressive worsening of brain and nervous system functions, including: Loss of the ability to detect sensations, such as touch, pain, heat and sound, Loss of intellectual, thinking and memory skills, Loss of motor skills, such as walking, moving, speaking and swallowing, Stiff, rigid muscles, poor muscle function and paralysis, Loss of bladder and bowel function, Gallbladder problems, Blindness, Hearing loss, Seizures, Emotional and behavioral problems, including unstable emotions and substance misuse.
Each form of metachromatic leukodystrophy occurs at a different age and can have different initial signs and symptoms and rates of progression:
Late infantile form. This is the most common form of metachromatic leukodystrophy, starting around 2 years of age or younger. Progressive loss of speech and muscle function occurs rapidly. Children with this form often do not survive beyond childhood.
Juvenile form. This is the second most common form and starts in children between 3 and 16 years of age. Early signs are behavior and cognitive problems and increasing difficulty in school. Loss of the ability to walk may occur. Although the juvenile form doesn't progress as fast as the late infantile form, survival is generally less than 20 years after symptoms begin.
Adult form. This form is less common and typically starts after age 16. Signs progress slowly and may begin with behavior and psychiatric problems, drug and alcohol misuse, and issues with school and work. Psychotic symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations may occur. The course of this form varies, with periods of stable symptoms and periods of rapid decline in functioning. Adults may survive for several decades after initial symptoms.
Talk to your doctor if you observe any signs listed above or if you have concerns about your own signs or symptoms.
Metachromatic leukodystrophy is an inherited disorder caused by an abnormal (mutated) gene. The condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. The abnormal recessive gene is located on one of the nonsex chromosomes (autosomes). To inherit an autosomal recessive disorder, both parents must be carriers, but they do not typically show signs of the condition. The affected child inherits two copies of the abnormal gene — one from each parent.
The most common cause of metachromatic leukodystrophy is a mutation in the ARSA gene. This mutation results in a lack of the enzyme that breaks down lipids called sulfatides that build up in the myelin.
Rarely, metachromatic leukodystrophy is caused by a deficiency in another kind of protein (activator protein) that breaks down sulfatides. This is caused by a mutation in the PSAP gene.
The buildup of sulfatides is toxic, destroying the myelin-producing cells ― also called white matter ― that protect the nerves. This results in damage to the function of nerve cells in the brain, spinal cord and peripheral nerves.
Symptoms of metatarsalgia can include: Sharp, aching or burning pain in the ball of your foot — the part of the sole just behind your toes, Pain that worsens when you stand, run, flex your feet or walk — especially barefoot on a hard surface — and improves when you rest, Sharp or shooting pain, numbness, or tingling in your toes, A feeling of having a pebble in your shoe.
Not all foot problems need medical care. Sometimes your feet ache after a long day of standing or a punishing workout. But it's best not to ignore foot pain that lasts more than a few days. Talk to your doctor if you have a burning pain in the ball of your foot that doesn't improve after changing your shoes and modifying your activities.
Sometimes a single factor can lead to metatarsalgia. More often, several factors are involved, including:
Intense training or activity. Distance runners are at risk of metatarsalgia, primarily because the front of the foot absorbs significant force when a person runs. But anyone who participates in a high-impact sport is at risk, especially if your shoes fit poorly or are worn.
Certain foot shapes. A high arch can put extra pressure on the metatarsals. So can having a second toe that's longer than the big toe, which causes more weight than normal to be shifted to the second metatarsal head.
Foot deformities. Wearing too-small shoes or high heels can cause your foot to be misshapen. A downward-curling toe (hammertoe) and swollen, painful bumps at the base of your big toes (bunions) can cause metatarsalgia.
Excess weight. Because most of your body weight transfers to your forefoot when you move, extra pounds mean more pressure on your metatarsals. Losing weight might reduce or eliminate symptoms.
Poorly fitting shoes. High heels, which transfer extra weight to the front of your foot, are a common cause of metatarsalgia in women. Shoes with a narrow toe box or athletic shoes that lack support and padding also can contribute to the problem.
Stress fractures. Small breaks in the metatarsals or toe bones can be painful and change the way you put weight on your foot.
Morton's neuroma. This noncancerous growth of fibrous tissue around a nerve usually occurs between the third and fourth metatarsal heads. It causes symptoms that are similar to metatarsalgia and can also contribute to metatarsal stress.
Almost anyone can develop metatarsalgia, but you're at higher risk if you: Participate in high-impact sports that involve running and jumping, Wear high heels, shoes that don't fit properly or shoes with spikes, such as cleats, Are overweight or obese, Have other foot problems, including hammertoe and calluses on the bottom of your feet, Have inflammatory arthritis, such as rheumatoid arthritis or gout.
Left untreated, metatarsalgia might lead to pain in other parts of the same or opposite foot and pain elsewhere in the body, such as the low back or hip, due to limping (altered gait) from foot pain.
The primary sign of microcephaly is: A head size significantly smaller than that of other children of the same age and sex.
Head size is measured as the distance around the top of the child's head (circumference). Using standardized growth charts, the measurement is compared with other children's measurements in percentiles.
Some children just have small heads, whose measurement falls as low as the first percentile. In children with microcephaly, head size measures significantly below average, possibly even below the first percentile for your baby's age and sex.
A child with more severe microcephaly may also have a backward-sloping forehead.
Chances are your doctor will detect microcephaly at the baby's birth or at a regular well-baby checkup. However, if you think your baby's head is smaller than normal or isn't growing as it should, talk to your doctor.
Microcephaly usually is the result of abnormal brain development, which can occur in the womb (congenital) or during infancy. Microcephaly may be genetic. Other causes may include:
Craniosynostosis. The premature fusing of the joints (sutures) between the bony plates that form an infant's skull keeps the brain from growing. Treating craniosynostosis (kray-nee-o-sin-os-TOE-sis) usually means your infant needs surgery to separate the fused bones. If there are no underlying problems in the brain, this surgery allows the brain adequate space to grow and develop.
Chromosomal abnormalities. Down syndrome and other conditions may result in microcephaly.
Decreased oxygen to the fetal brain (cerebral anoxia). Certain complications of pregnancy or delivery can impair oxygen delivery to the fetal brain.
Infections passed to the fetus during pregnancy. These include toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, German measles (rubella), chickenpox (varicella) and Zika virus.
Exposure to drugs, alcohol or certain toxic chemicals in the womb. Any of these put your baby at risk of brain abnormalities.
Severe malnutrition. Not getting adequate nutrition during pregnancy can affect your baby's development.
Uncontrolled phenylketonuria (fen-ul-kee-toe-NU-ree-uh), also known as PKU, in the mother. PKU is a birth defect that hampers the body's ability to break down the amino acid phenylalanine.
Some children with microcephaly are of normal intelligence and development, even though their heads will always be small for their age and sex. But depending on the cause and severity of the microcephaly, complications may include: Developmental delays, such as in speech and movement, Difficulties with coordination and balance, Dwarfism or short stature, Facial distortions, Hyperactivity, Intellectual disabilities, Seizures.
Signs and symptoms of microscopic colitis include: Chronic watery diarrhea, Abdominal pain, cramps or bloating, Weight loss, Nausea, Fecal incontinence, Dehydration.
The symptoms of microscopic colitis can come and go frequently. Sometimes the symptoms resolve on their own.
If you have watery diarrhea that lasts more than a few days, contact your doctor so that your condition can be diagnosed and properly treated.
It's not clear what causes the inflammation of the colon found in microscopic colitis. Researchers believe that the causes may include:
Medications that can irritate the lining of the colon.
Bacteria that produce toxins that irritate the lining of the colon.
Viruses that trigger inflammation.
Autoimmune disease associated with microscopic colitis, such as rheumatoid arthritis, celiac disease or psoriasis. Autoimmune disease occurs when your body's immune system attacks healthy tissues.
Bile acid not being properly absorbed and irritating the lining of the colon.
Risk factors for microscopic colitis include:
Age. Microscopic colitis is most common in people ages 50 to 70.
Sex. Women are more likely to have microscopic colitis than are men. Some studies suggest an association between post-menopausal hormone therapy and microscopic colitis.
Autoimmune disease. People with microscopic colitis sometimes also have an autoimmune disorder, such as celiac disease, thyroid disease, rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes or psoriasis.
Genetic link. Research suggests that there may be a connection between microscopic colitis and a family history of irritable bowel syndrome.
Smoking. Recent research studies have shown an association between tobacco smoking and microscopic colitis, especially in people ages 16 to 44.
Some research studies indicate that using certain medications may increase your risk of microscopic colitis. But not all studies agree.
Medications that may be linked to the condition include: Pain relievers, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve), Proton pump inhibitors including lansoprazole (Prevacid), esomeprazole (Nexium), pantoprazole (Protonix), rabeprazole (Aciphex), omeprazole (Prilosec) and dexlansoprazole (Dexilant), Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as sertraline (Zoloft), Acarbose (Precose), Flutamide, Ranitidine, Carbamazepine (Carbatrol, Tegretol), Clozapine (Clozaril, Fazaclo), Entacapone (Comtan), Paroxetine (Paxil, Pexeva), Simvastatin (Zocor), Topiramate.
Most people are successfully treated for microscopic colitis. The condition does not increase your risk of colon cancer.
Migraine aura symptoms include temporary visual or other disturbances that usually strike before other migraine symptoms — such as intense head pain, nausea, and sensitivity to light and sound.
Migraine aura usually occurs within an hour before head pain begins and generally lasts less than 60 minutes. Sometimes migraine aura occurs with little or no headache, especially in people age 50 and older.
Most people who have migraine with aura develop temporary visual signs and symptoms. which tend to start in the center of the field of vision and spread outward. These might include: Blind spots (scotomas), which are sometimes outlined by simple geometric designs, Zigzag lines that gradually float across your field of vision, Shimmering spots or stars, Changes in vision or vision loss, Flashes of light.
Other temporary disturbances sometimes associated with migraine aura include: Numbness, typically felt as tingling in one hand or on one side of your face that may spread slowly along a limb, Speech or language difficulty, Muscle weakness.
See your doctor immediately if you have the signs and symptoms of migraine with aura, such as temporary vision loss or floating spots or zigzag lines in your field of vision. Your doctor will need to rule out more-serious conditions, such as a stroke or retinal tear.
The cause of migraine with aura isn't entirely understood. There is evidence that the migraine with visual aura is like an electrical or chemical wave that moves across the part of your brain that processes visual signals (visual cortex) and causes these visual hallucinations.
Many of the same factors that trigger migraine can also trigger migraine with aura, including stress, bright lights, some foods and medications, too much or too little sleep, and menstruation.
Although no specific factors appear to increase the risk of migraine with aura, migraines in general seem to be more common in people with a family history of migraine. Migraines are also more common in women than in men.
People who have migraine with aura are at a mildly increased risk of stroke.
Migraines, which often begin in childhood, adolescence or early adulthood, can progress through four stages: prodrome, aura, attack and post-drome. Not everyone who has migraines goes through all stages.
One or two days before a migraine, you might notice subtle changes that warn of an upcoming migraine, including: Constipation, Mood changes, from depression to euphoria, Food cravings, Neck stiffness, Increased thirst and urination, Frequent yawning.
For some people, aura might occur before or during migraines. Auras are reversible symptoms of the nervous system. They're usually visual, but can also include other disturbances. Each symptom usually begins gradually, builds up over several minutes and lasts for 20 to 60 minutes.
Examples of migraine aura include: Visual phenomena, such as seeing various shapes, bright spots or flashes of light, Vision loss, Pins and needles sensations in an arm or leg, Weakness or numbness in the face or one side of the body, Difficulty speaking, Hearing noises or music, Uncontrollable jerking or other movements.
A migraine usually lasts from four to 72 hours if untreated. How often migraines occur varies from person to person. Migraines might occur rarely or strike several times a month.
During a migraine, you might have: Pain usually on one side of your head, but often on both sides, Pain that throbs or pulses, Sensitivity to light, sound, and sometimes smell and touch, Nausea and vomiting.
After a migraine attack, you might feel drained, confused and washed out for up to a day. Some people report feeling elated. Sudden head movement might bring on the pain again briefly.
Migraines are often undiagnosed and untreated. If you regularly have signs and symptoms of migraine, keep a record of your attacks and how you treated them. Then make an appointment with your doctor to discuss your headaches.
Even if you have a history of headaches, see your doctor if the pattern changes or your headaches suddenly feel different.
See your doctor immediately or go to the emergency room if you have any of the following signs and symptoms, which could indicate a more serious medical problem: An abrupt, severe headache like a thunderclap, Headache with fever, stiff neck, mental confusion, seizures, double vision, weakness, numbness or trouble speaking, Headache after a head injury, especially if the headache worsens, A chronic headache that is worse after coughing, exertion, straining or a sudden movement, New headache pain after age 50.
Though migraine causes aren't fully understood, genetics and environmental factors appear to play a role.
Changes in the brainstem and its interactions with the trigeminal nerve, a major pain pathway, might be involved. So might imbalances in brain chemicals — including serotonin, which helps regulate pain in your nervous system.
Researchers are studying the role of serotonin in migraines. Other neurotransmitters play a role in the pain of migraine, including calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP).
There are a number of migraine triggers, including:
Hormonal changes in women. Fluctuations in estrogen, such as before or during menstrual periods, pregnancy and menopause, seem to trigger headaches in many women.
Hormonal medications, such as oral contraceptives and hormone replacement therapy, also can worsen migraines. Some women, however, find their migraines occurring less often when taking these medications.
Drinks. These include alcohol, especially wine, and too much caffeine, such as coffee.
Stress. Stress at work or home can cause migraines.
Sensory stimuli. Bright lights and sun glare can induce migraines, as can loud sounds. Strong smells — including perfume, paint thinner, secondhand smoke and others — trigger migraines in some people.
Sleep changes. Missing sleep, getting too much sleep or jet lag can trigger migraines in some people.
Physical factors. Intense physical exertion, including sexual activity, might provoke migraines.
Weather changes. A change of weather or barometric pressure can prompt a migraine.
Medications. Oral contraceptives and vasodilators, such as nitroglycerin, can aggravate migraines.
Foods. Aged cheeses and salty and processed foods might trigger migraines. So might skipping meals or fasting.
Food additives. These include the sweetener aspartame and the preservative monosodium glutamate (MSG), found in many foods.
Several factors make you more prone to having migraines, including:
Family history. If you have a family member with migraines, then you have a good chance of developing them too.
Age. Migraines can begin at any age, though the first often occurs during adolescence. Migraines tend to peak during your 30s, and gradually become less severe and less frequent in the following decades.
Sex. Women are three times more likely to have migraines.
Hormonal changes. For women who have migraines, headaches might begin just before or shortly after onset of menstruation. They might also change during pregnancy or menopause. Migraines generally improve after menopause.
Taking combination painkillers, such as Excedrin Migraine for more than 10 days a month for three months or in higher doses can trigger serious medication-overuse headaches. The same is true if you take aspirin or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) for more than 15 days a month or triptans, sumatriptan (Imitrex, Tosymra) or rizatriptan (Maxalt), for more than nine days a month.
Medication-overuse headaches occur when medications stop relieving pain and begin to cause headaches. You then use more pain medication, which continues the cycle.
Your brain, like the rest of your body, changes as you grow older. Many people notice gradually increasing forgetfulness as they age. It may take longer to think of a word or to recall a person's name.
But consistent or increasing concern about your mental performance may suggest mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Cognitive issues may go beyond what's expected and indicate possible MCI if you experience any or all of the following:
You forget things more often.
You forget important events such as appointments or social engagements.
You lose your train of thought or the thread of conversations, books or movies.
You feel increasingly overwhelmed by making decisions, planning steps to accomplish a task or understanding instructions.
You start to have trouble finding your way around familiar environments.
You become more impulsive or show increasingly poor judgment.
Your family and friends notice any of these changes.
If you have MCI, you may also experience: Depression, Irritability and aggression, Anxiety, Apathy.
There's no single cause of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), just as there's no single outcome for the disorder. Symptoms of MCI may remain stable for years, progress to Alzheimer's disease or another type of dementia, or improve over time.
Current evidence indicates that MCI often, but not always, develops from a lesser degree of the same types of brain changes seen in Alzheimer's disease or other forms of dementia. Some of these changes have been identified in autopsy studies of people with MCI. These changes include: Abnormal clumps of beta-amyloid protein (plaques) and microscopic protein clumps of tau characteristic of Alzheimer's disease (tangles), Lewy bodies, which are microscopic clumps of another protein associated with Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and some cases of Alzheimer's disease, Small strokes or reduced blood flow through brain blood vessels.
Brain-imaging studies show that the following changes may be associated with MCI: Shrinkage of the hippocampus, a brain region important for memory, Enlargement of the brain's fluid-filled spaces (ventricles), Reduced use of glucose, the sugar that's the primary source of energy for cells, in key brain regions.
The strongest risk factors for MCI are: Increasing age, Having a specific form of a gene known as APOE e4, also linked to Alzheimer's disease — though having the gene doesn't guarantee that you'll experience cognitive decline.
Other medical conditions and lifestyle factors have been linked to an increased risk of cognitive change, including: Diabetes, Smoking, High blood pressure, Elevated cholesterol, Obesity, Depression, Lack of physical exercise, Low education level, Infrequent participation in mentally or socially stimulating activities.
People with MCI have a significantly increased risk — but not a certainty — of developing dementia. Overall, about 1% to 3% of older adults develop dementia every year. Studies suggest that around 10% to 15% of individuals with MCI go on to develop dementia each year.
Milia are most commonly seen on a baby's nose, chin or cheeks, though they may also occur in other areas, such as on the upper trunk and limbs.
Sometimes similar bumps appear on a baby's gums or the roof of the mouth. These are known as Epstein pearls. Some babies also develop baby acne, often characterized by small red bumps and pustules on the cheeks, chin and forehead, which can occur with or without milia.
If you're concerned about your baby's complexion or it doesn't clear up within three months, consult your baby's doctor.
Milia develop when tiny skin flakes become trapped in small pockets near the surface of the skin.
Milk allergy symptoms, which differ from person to person, occur a few minutes to a few hours after you or your child drinks milk or eats milk products.
Immediate signs and symptoms of milk allergy might include: Hives, Wheezing, Itching or tingling feeling around the lips or mouth, Swelling of the lips, tongue or throat, Coughing or shortness of breath, Vomiting.
Signs and symptoms that may take more time to develop include: Loose stools or diarrhea, which may contain blood, Abdominal cramps, Runny nose, Watery eyes, Colic, in babies.
A true milk allergy differs from milk protein intolerance and lactose intolerance. Unlike milk allergy, intolerance doesn't involve the immune system. Milk intolerance requires different treatment from true milk allergy.
Common signs and symptoms of milk protein intolerance or lactose intolerance include digestive problems, such as bloating, gas or diarrhea, after consuming milk or products containing milk.
Milk allergy can cause anaphylaxis, a life-threatening reaction that narrows the airways and can block breathing. Milk is the third most common food — after peanuts and tree nuts — to cause anaphylaxis.
If you or your child has a reaction to milk, tell your doctor, no matter how mild the reaction. Tests can help confirm milk allergy, so you can avoid future and potentially worse reactions.
Anaphylaxis is a medical emergency and requires treatment with an epinephrine (adrenaline) shot (EpiPen, Adrenaclick, others) and a trip to the emergency room. Signs and symptoms start soon after milk consumption and can include: Constriction of airways, including a swollen throat that makes it difficult to breathe, Facial flushing, Itching, Shock, with a marked drop in blood pressure.
See your doctor or an allergist if you or your child experiences milk allergy symptoms shortly after consuming milk. If possible, see your doctor during the allergic reaction to help the doctor make a diagnosis. Seek emergency treatment if you or your child develops signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis.
All true food allergies are caused by an immune system malfunction. If you have milk allergy, your immune system identifies certain milk proteins as harmful, triggering the production of immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies to neutralize the protein (allergen). The next time you come in contact with these proteins, IgE antibodies recognize them and signal your immune system to release histamine and other chemicals, causing a range of allergic signs and symptoms.
There are two main proteins in cow's milk that can cause an allergic reaction: Casein, found in the solid part (curd) of milk that curdles, Whey, found in the liquid part of milk that remains after milk curdles.
You or your child may be allergic to only one milk protein or to both. These proteins may be hard to avoid because they're also in some processed foods. And most people who react to cow's milk will react to sheep's, goat's and buffalo's milk. Less commonly, people allergic to cow's milk are also allergic to soy milk.
A food allergen can also cause what's sometimes called a delayed food allergy. Although any food can be a trigger, milk is one of the most common. The reaction, commonly vomiting and diarrhea, usually occurs within hours after eating the trigger rather than within minutes.
Unlike some food allergies, FPIES usually resolves over time. As with milk allergy, preventing an FPIES reaction involves avoiding milk and milk products.
Certain factors may increase the risk of developing milk allergy:
Other allergies. Many children allergic to milk also have other allergies. Milk allergy may develop before other allergies.
Atopic dermatitis. Children who have atopic dermatitis — a common, chronic inflammation of the skin — are much more likely to develop a food allergy.
Family history. A person's risk of a food allergy increases if one or both parents have a food allergy or another type of allergy or allergic disease — such as hay fever, asthma, hives or eczema.
Age. Milk allergy is more common in children. As they age, their digestive systems mature, and their bodies are less likely to react to milk.
Children who are allergic to milk are more likely to develop certain other health problems, including: Allergies to other foods — such as eggs, soy, peanuts or even beef, Hay fever — a common reaction to pet dander, dust mites, grass pollen and other substances.
Most miscarriages occur before the 12th week of pregnancy.
Signs and symptoms of a miscarriage might include: Vaginal spotting or bleeding, Pain or cramping in your abdomen or lower back, Fluid or tissue passing from your vagina.
If you have passed fetal tissue from your vagina, place it in a clean container and bring it to your health care provider's office or the hospital for analysis.
Keep in mind that most women who experience vaginal spotting or bleeding in the first trimester go on to have successful pregnancies.
Most miscarriages occur because the fetus isn't developing normally. About 50 percent of miscarriages are associated with extra or missing chromosomes. Most often, chromosome problems result from errors that occur by chance as the embryo divides and grows — not problems inherited from the parents.
Chromosomal abnormalities might lead to:
Blighted ovum. Blighted ovum occurs when no embryo forms.
Intrauterine fetal demise. In this situation, an embryo forms but stops developing and dies before any symptoms of pregnancy loss occur.
Molar pregnancy and partial molar pregnancy. With a molar pregnancy, both sets of chromosomes come from the father. A molar pregnancy is associated with abnormal growth of the placenta; there is usually no fetal development.
A partial molar pregnancy occurs when the mother's chromosomes remain, but the father provides two sets of chromosomes. A partial molar pregnancy is usually associated with abnormalities of the placenta, and an abnormal fetus.
Molar and partial molar pregnancies are not viable pregnancies. Molar and partial molar pregnancies can sometimes be associated with cancerous changes of the placenta.
In a few cases, a mother's health condition might lead to miscarriage. Examples include: Uncontrolled diabetes, Infections, Hormonal problems, Uterus or cervix problems, Thyroid disease.
Routine activities such as these don't provoke a miscarriage:
Exercise, including high-intensity activities such as jogging and cycling.
Sexual intercourse.
Working, provided you're not exposed to harmful chemicals or radiation. Talk with your doctor if you are concerned about work-related risks.
Various factors increase the risk of miscarriage, including:
Age. Women older than age 35 have a higher risk of miscarriage than do younger women. At age 35, you have about a 20 percent risk. At age 40, the risk is about 40 percent. And at age 45, it's about 80 percent.
Previous miscarriages. Women who have had two or more consecutive miscarriages are at higher risk of miscarriage.
Chronic conditions. Women who have a chronic condition, such as uncontrolled diabetes, have a higher risk of miscarriage.
Uterine or cervical problems. Certain uterine abnormalities or weak cervical tissues (incompetent cervix) might increase the risk of miscarriage.
Smoking, alcohol and illicit drugs. Women who smoke during pregnancy have a greater risk of miscarriage than do nonsmokers. Heavy alcohol use and illicit drug use also increase the risk of miscarriage.
Weight. Being underweight or being overweight has been linked with an increased risk of miscarriage.
Invasive prenatal tests. Some invasive prenatal genetic tests, such as chorionic villus sampling and amniocentesis, carry a slight risk of miscarriage.
Some women who miscarry develop a uterine infection, also called a septic miscarriage. Signs and symptoms of this infection include: Fever, Chills, Lower abdominal tenderness, Foul-smelling vaginal discharge.
Some people with mitral valve disease might not experience symptoms for many years. Signs and symptoms of mitral valve disease may include: Abnormal heart sound (heart murmur) heard through a stethoscope, Fatigue, Shortness of breath, particularly when you have been very active or when you lie down, Irregular heartbeat.
If you have a heart murmur, your doctor may recommend that you visit a cardiologist. If you develop any symptoms that may suggest mitral valve disease, see your doctor.
Your heart has four valves that keep blood flowing in the correct direction. These valves include the mitral valve, tricuspid valve, pulmonary valve and aortic valve. Each valve has flaps (leaflets or cusps) that open and close once during each heartbeat. Sometimes, the valves don't open or close properly, disrupting the blood flow through your heart to your body.
In mitral valve disease, the mitral valve between the upper left heart chamber (left atrium) and the lower left heart chamber (left ventricle) doesn't work properly. It may not be closing properly, which causes blood to leak backward to the left atrium (regurgitation), or the valve may be narrowed (stenosis).
Mitral valve disease has many causes. Some forms of mitral valve disease can be present at birth (congenital heart defect).
Mitral valve regurgitation can be caused by problems with the mitral valve, also called primary mitral valve regurgitation. Mitral valve regurgitation is often caused by mitral valve prolapse, in which the mitral valve flaps (leaflets) bulge back into the left atrium. Diseases of the left ventricle can lead to secondary mitral valve regurgitation.
Mitral valve stenosis is often caused by rheumatic fever, which is a complication of a strep infection that can affect the heart.
Several factors can increase your risk of mitral valve disease, including: Older age, History of certain infections that can affect the heart, History of certain forms of heart disease or heart attack, History of use of certain drugs, Heart conditions present at birth (congenital heart disease), Radiation to the chest.
Mitral valve disease can cause many complications, including: Irregular heart rhythms in the upper heart chambers (atrial fibrillation), High blood pressure that affects the blood vessels in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension), Blood clots, Heart failure, Stroke.
Although mitral valve prolapse is usually a lifelong disorder, many people with this condition never have symptoms. When diagnosed, people may be surprised to learn that they have a heart condition.
When signs and symptoms do occur, it may be because blood is leaking backward through the valve. Mitral valve prolapse symptoms can vary widely from one person to another. They tend to be mild and develop gradually. Symptoms may include: A racing or irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia), Dizziness or lightheadedness, Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, often during physical activity or when lying flat, Fatigue.
If you think you have any of the above symptoms, make an appointment with your doctor. Many other conditions cause the same symptoms as mitral valve prolapse, so only a visit to your doctor can determine the cause of your symptoms.
If you're having chest pain and you're unsure if it could be a heart attack, seek emergency medical care immediately.
If you've already been diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse, see your doctor if your symptoms worsen.
The mitral valve controls the flow of blood between the upper and lower chambers of the left side of the heart. When your heart is working properly, the mitral valve closes completely when the heart pumps and prevents blood from flowing back into the upper left chamber (left atrium).
But in some people with mitral valve prolapse, one or both of the mitral valve leaflets have extra tissue or stretch more than normal, which causes them to bulge like a parachute into the left atrium each time the heart contracts.
The bulging may keep the valve from closing tightly. In some cases, blood may leak backward through the valve (mitral valve regurgitation).
This may not cause problems if only a small amount of blood leaks back into the left atrium. More severe mitral valve regurgitation can cause symptoms such as shortness of breath, fatigue or lightheadedness.
Another name for mitral valve prolapse is click-murmur syndrome. When a doctor listens to your heart using a stethoscope, he or she may hear a clicking sound as the valve's leaflets billow back, followed by a whooshing sound (murmur) resulting from blood flowing back into the atrium.
Other names to describe mitral valve prolapse include: Barlow's syndrome, Floppy valve syndrome, Billowing mitral valve syndrome, Myxomatous mitral valve disease.
Mitral valve prolapse can develop in any person at any age. Serious symptoms of mitral valve prolapse tend to occur most often in men older than 50.
Mitral valve prolapse can run in families and may be linked to several other conditions, such as: Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Ebstein anomaly, Muscular dystrophy, Graves' disease, Scoliosis.
Although most people with mitral valve prolapse never have problems, complications can occur. They may include:
Mitral valve regurgitation. The most common complication is a condition in which the valve leaks blood back into the left atrium.
Being male or having high blood pressure increases your risk of mitral valve regurgitation.
If regurgitation is severe, you may need surgery to repair or replace the valve in order to prevent heart failure.
Heart rhythm problems (arrhythmias). Irregular heart rhythms most commonly occur in the upper chambers of the heart. They may be bothersome, but aren't usually life-threatening.
People with severe mitral valve regurgitation or severe deformity of their mitral valve are most at risk of having rhythm problems, which can affect blood flow through the heart.
Heart valve infection (endocarditis). The inside of your heart is lined by a thin membrane called the endocardium. Endocarditis is an infection of this inner lining.
An abnormal mitral valve increases your chance of getting endocarditis from bacteria, which can further damage the mitral valve.
Some people with mitral valve disease might not experience symptoms for many years. Signs and symptoms of mitral valve regurgitation, which depend on its severity and how quickly the condition develops, can include: Abnormal heart sound (heart murmur) heard through a stethoscope, Shortness of breath (dyspnea), especially when you have been very active or when you lie down, Fatigue, Heart palpitations — sensations of a rapid, fluttering heartbeat, Swollen feet or ankles.
Mitral valve regurgitation is often mild and progresses slowly. You may have no symptoms for many years and be unaware that you have this condition, and it might not progress.
Your doctor might first suspect you have mitral valve regurgitation upon detecting a heart murmur. Sometimes, however, the problem develops quickly, and you may experience a sudden onset of severe signs and symptoms.
If your doctor hears a heart murmur when listening to your heart with a stethoscope, he or she may recommend that you visit a cardiologist and get an echocardiogram. If you develop symptoms that suggest mitral valve regurgitation or another problem with your heart, see your doctor right away. Sometimes the first indications are actually those of mitral valve regurgitation's complications, including heart failure, a condition in which your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs.
Your heart has four valves that keep blood flowing in the correct direction. These valves include the mitral valve, tricuspid valve, pulmonary valve and aortic valve. Each valve has flaps (leaflets or cusps) that open and close once during each heartbeat. Sometimes, the valves don't open or close properly, disrupting the blood flow through your heart to your body.
In mitral valve regurgitation, the valve between the upper left heart chamber (left atrium) and the lower left heart chamber (left ventricle) doesn't close tightly, causing blood to leak backward into the left atrium (regurgitation).
Mitral valve regurgitation can be caused by problems with the mitral valve, also called primary mitral valve regurgitation. Diseases of the left ventricle can lead to secondary or functional mitral valve regurgitation.
Possible causes of mitral valve regurgitation include:
Mitral valve prolapse. In this condition, the mitral valve's leaflets bulge back into the left atrium during the heart's contraction. This common heart defect can prevent the mitral valve from closing tightly and lead to regurgitation.
Damaged tissue cords. Over time, the tissue cords that anchor the flaps of the mitral valve to the heart wall may stretch or tear, especially in people with mitral valve prolapse. A tear can cause leakage through the mitral valve suddenly and may require repair by heart surgery. Trauma to the chest also can rupture the cords.
Rheumatic fever. Rheumatic fever — a complication of untreated strep throat — can damage the mitral valve, leading to mitral valve regurgitation early or later in life. Rheumatic fever is now rare in the United States, but it's still common in developing countries.
Endocarditis. The mitral valve may be damaged by an infection of the lining of the heart (endocarditis) that can involve heart valves.
Heart attack. A heart attack can damage the area of the heart muscle that supports the mitral valve, affecting the function of the valve. If the damage is extensive enough, a heart attack can cause sudden and severe mitral valve regurgitation.
Abnormality of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy). Over time, certain conditions, such as high blood pressure, can cause your heart to work harder, gradually enlarging your heart's left ventricle. This can stretch the tissue around your mitral valve, which can lead to leakage.
Trauma. Experiencing trauma, such as in a car accident, can lead to mitral valve regurgitation.
Congenital heart defects. Some babies are born with defects in their hearts, including damaged heart valves.
Certain drugs. Prolonged use of certain medications can cause mitral valve regurgitation, such as those containing ergotamine (Cafergot, Migergot) that are used to treat migraines and other conditions.
Radiation therapy. In rare cases, radiation therapy for cancer that is focused on the chest area can lead to mitral valve regurgitation.
Atrial fibrillation. Atrial fibrillation is a common heart rhythm problem that can be a potential cause of mitral valve regurgitation.
Several factors can increase your risk of mitral valve regurgitation, including:
A history of mitral valve prolapse or mitral valve stenosis. However, having either condition doesn't necessarily mean you'll develop mitral valve regurgitation. A family history of valve disease also can increase risk.
A heart attack. A heart attack can damage your heart, affecting the function of the mitral valve.
Heart disease. Certain forms of heart disease, such as coronary artery disease, can lead to mitral valve regurgitation.
Use of certain medications. People who take drugs containing ergotamine (Cafergot, Migergot) and similar medicines for migraines or who take cabergoline have an increased risk of mitral regurgitation. Similar problems were noted with the appetite suppressants fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine, which are no longer sold.
Infections such as endocarditis or rheumatic fever. Infections or the inflammation they cause can damage the mitral valve.
Congenital heart disease. Some people are born with an abnormal mitral valve prone to regurgitation.
Age. By middle age, many people have some mitral valve regurgitation caused by natural deterioration of the valve.
When it's mild, mitral valve regurgitation usually does not cause any problems. However, severe mitral valve regurgitation can lead to complications, including:
Heart failure. Heart failure results when your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs. Severe mitral valve regurgitation places an extra strain on the heart because, with blood pumping backward, there is less blood going forward with each beat. The left ventricle gets bigger and, if untreated, weakens. This can cause heart failure.
Also, pressure builds in your lungs, leading to fluid accumulation, which strains the right side of the heart.
Atrial fibrillation. The stretching and enlargement of your heart's left atrium may lead to this heart rhythm irregularity in which the upper chambers of your heart beat chaotically and rapidly. Atrial fibrillation can cause blood clots, which can break loose from your heart and travel to other parts of your body, causing serious problems, such as a stroke if a clot blocks a blood vessel in your brain.
Pulmonary hypertension. If you have long-term untreated or improperly treated mitral regurgitation, you can develop a type of high blood pressure that affects the vessels in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension). A leaky mitral valve can increase pressure in the left atrium, which can eventually cause pulmonary hypertension. This can lead to heart failure on the right side of the heart.
You may feel fine with mitral valve stenosis, or you may have minimal symptoms for decades. Mitral valve stenosis usually progresses slowly over time. See your doctor if you develop: Shortness of breath, especially with exertion or when you lie down, Fatigue, especially during increased physical activity, Swollen feet or legs, Heart palpitations — sensations of a rapid, fluttering heartbeat, Dizziness or fainting, Coughing up blood, Chest discomfort or chest pain.
Mitral valve stenosis symptoms may appear or worsen anytime your heart rate increases, such as during exercise. An episode of rapid heartbeats may accompany these symptoms. Or they may be triggered by pregnancy or other body stress, such as an infection.
In mitral valve stenosis, pressure that builds up in the heart is then sent back to the lungs, resulting in fluid buildup (congestion) and shortness of breath.
Symptoms of mitral valve stenosis most often appear in between the ages of 15 and 40 in developed nations, but they can occur at any age — even during childhood.
Mitral valve stenosis may also produce signs that your doctor will find during your examination. These may include: Heart murmur, Fluid buildup in the lungs, Irregular heart rhythms (arrhythmias).
Call your doctor for an immediate appointment if you develop fatigue or shortness of breath during physical activity, heart palpitations, or chest pain.
If you have been diagnosed with mitral valve stenosis but haven't had symptoms, talk to your doctor about follow-up evaluations.
Causes of mitral valve stenosis include:
Rheumatic fever. A complication of strep throat, rheumatic fever can damage the mitral valve. Rheumatic fever is the most common cause of mitral valve stenosis. It can damage the mitral valve by causing the flaps to thicken or fuse. Signs and symptoms of mitral valve stenosis might not show up for years.
Calcium deposits. As you age, calcium deposits can build up around the ring around the mitral valve (annulus), which can occasionally cause mitral valve stenosis.
Other causes. In rare cases, babies are born with a narrowed mitral valve (congenital defect) that causes problems over time. Other rare causes include radiation to the chest and some autoimmune diseases, such as lupus.
The heart, the center of your circulatory system, consists of four chambers. The two upper chambers (atria) receive blood. The two lower chambers (ventricles) pump blood.
Four heart valves open and close to let blood flow in only one direction through your heart. The mitral valve — which lies between the two chambers on the left side of your heart — comprises two flaps of tissue called leaflets.
The mitral valve opens when blood flows from the left atrium to the left ventricle. Then the flaps close to prevent the blood that has just passed into the left ventricle from flowing backward. A defective heart valve fails to either open or close fully.
Mitral valve stenosis is less common today than it once was because the most common cause, rheumatic fever, is rare in the United States. However, rheumatic fever remains a problem in developing nations.
Risk factors for mitral valve stenosis include: History of rheumatic fever, Untreated strep infections.
Like other heart valve problems, mitral valve stenosis can strain your heart and decrease blood flow. Untreated, mitral valve stenosis can lead to complications such as:
Pulmonary hypertension. This is a condition in which there's increased pressure in the arteries that carry blood from your heart to your lungs (pulmonary arteries), causing your heart to work harder.
Heart failure. A narrowed mitral valve interferes with blood flow. This can cause pressure to build in your lungs, leading to fluid accumulation. The fluid buildup strains the right side of the heart, leading to right heart failure.
When blood and fluid back up into your lungs, it can cause a condition known as pulmonary edema. This can lead to shortness of breath and, sometimes, coughing up of blood-tinged sputum.
Heart enlargement. The pressure buildup of mitral valve stenosis results in enlargement of your heart's upper left chamber (atrium).
Atrial fibrillation. The stretching and enlargement of your heart's left atrium may lead to this heart rhythm irregularity in which the upper chambers of your heart beat chaotically and too quickly.
Blood clots. Untreated atrial fibrillation can cause blood clots to form in the upper left chamber of your heart. Blood clots from your heart can break loose and travel to other parts of your body, causing serious problems, such as a stroke if a clot blocks a blood vessel in your brain.
Mittelschmerz pain usually lasts a few minutes to a few hours, but it may continue for as long as a day or two. Pain from mittelschmerz may be: On one side of your lower abdomen, Dull and achy, similar to menstrual cramps, Sharp and sudden, Accompanied by slight vaginal bleeding or discharge, Rarely, severe.
Mittelschmerz pain occurs on the side of the ovary that's releasing an egg (ovulating). The pain may switch sides every other month, or you may feel pain on the same side for several months.
Keep track of your menstrual cycle for several months and note when you feel lower abdominal pain. If it occurs midcycle and goes away without treatment, it's most likely mittelschmerz.
Mittelschmerz rarely requires medical intervention. However, contact your doctor if a new pelvic pain becomes severe, if it's accompanied by nausea or fever, or if it persists — any of which could indicate you have a condition more serious than mittelschmerz, such as appendicitis, pelvic inflammatory disease or even an ectopic pregnancy.
Mittelschmerz occurs during ovulation, when the follicle ruptures and releases its egg. Some women have mittelschmerz every month; others have it only occasionally.
The exact cause of mittelschmerz is unknown, but possible reasons for the pain include these:
Just before an egg is released with ovulation, follicle growth stretches the surface of your ovary, causing pain.
Blood or fluid released from the ruptured follicle irritates the lining of your abdomen (peritoneum), leading to pain.
Pain at any other point in your menstrual cycle isn't mittelschmerz. It may be normal menstrual cramping (dysmenorrhea) if it occurs during your period, or it may be from other abdominal or pelvic problems. If you have severe pain, see your doctor.
Early indications of mixed connective tissue disease can include:
General feeling of being unwell. This can include increased fatigue and a mild fever.
Cold and numb fingers or toes (Raynaud's phenomenon). In response to cold or stress, your fingers or toes might turn white and then purplish blue. After warming, the fingers or toes turn red.
Swollen fingers or hands. Some people have swelling of the fingers.
Muscle and joint pain. Joints can become inflamed, swollen and deformed, similar to what occurs with rheumatoid arthritis.
Rash. Red or reddish brown patches can appear over the knuckles.
See your doctor if you have signs and symptoms that interfere with your daily routine — particularly if you've been diagnosed with lupus or another connective tissue disease.
Mixed connective tissue disease is an autoimmune disorder, although the cause isn't known. In autoimmune disorders, your immune system — responsible for fighting off disease — mistakenly attacks healthy cells.
In connective tissue diseases, your immune system attacks the fibers that provide the framework and support for your body. Some people with mixed connective tissue disease have a family history of the condition. But the role of genetics in the disease remains unclear.
Mixed connective tissue disease can occur in people of any age. However, it appears to be most common in women under the age of 50.
Mixed connective tissue disease can lead to serious complications, some of which can be fatal. Complications include:
High blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension). This condition is a major cause of death in people with mixed connective tissue disease.
Interstitial lung disease. This large group of disorders can cause scarring in your lungs, which affects your ability to breathe.
Heart disease. Parts of the heart can enlarge, or inflammation can occur around the heart. Heart failure can occur.
Kidney damage. About one-fourth of people with mixed connective tissue disease develop kidney problems, Kidney involvement is usually mild, but can lead to kidney failure.
Digestive tract damage. Commonly, mixed connective tissue disease affects the digestive tract. You might have abdominal pain and problems with swallowing and digesting food.
Anemia. About 75% of people with mixed connective tissue disease have iron deficiency anemia.
Tissue death. People with severe Raynaud's disease can develop gangrene in the fingers.
Hearing loss. In one small study, hearing loss was reported in almost half the patients with mixed connective tissue disease. More research is needed to understand this association.
Nerve damage. Sjogren syndrome can affect the nerve that carries feeling from your face to your brain (trigeminal nerve). If you have trigeminal neuralgia, even mild stimulation of your face — such as from brushing your teeth or putting on makeup — can trigger a jolt of severe pain.
A molar pregnancy may seem like a normal pregnancy at first, but most molar pregnancies cause specific signs and symptoms, including: Dark brown to bright red vaginal bleeding during the first trimester, Severe nausea and vomiting, Sometimes vaginal passage of grapelike cysts, Pelvic pressure or pain.
If you experience any signs or symptoms of a molar pregnancy, consult your doctor or pregnancy care provider. He or she may detect other signs of a molar pregnancy, such as: Rapid uterine growth — the uterus is too large for the stage of pregnancy, High blood pressure, Preeclampsia — a condition that causes high blood pressure and protein in the urine after 20 weeks of pregnancy, Ovarian cysts, Anemia, Overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism).
A molar pregnancy is caused by an abnormally fertilized egg. Human cells normally contain 23 pairs of chromosomes. One chromosome in each pair comes from the father, the other from the mother.
In a complete molar pregnancy, an empty egg is fertilized by one or two sperm, and all of the genetic material is from the father. In this situation, the chromosomes from the mother's egg are lost or inactivated and the father's chromosomes are duplicated.
In a partial or incomplete molar pregnancy, the mother's chromosomes remain but the father provides two sets of chromosomes. As a result, the embryo has 69 chromosomes instead of 46. This most often occurs when two sperm fertilize an egg, resulting in an extra copy of the father's genetic material.
Approximately 1 in every 1,000 pregnancies is diagnosed as a molar pregnancy. Various factors are associated with molar pregnancy, including:
Maternal age. A molar pregnancy is more likely in women older than age 35 or younger than age 20.
Previous molar pregnancy. If you've had one molar pregnancy, you're more likely to have another. A repeat molar pregnancy happens, on average, in 1 out of every 100 women.
After a molar pregnancy has been removed, molar tissue may remain and continue to grow. This is called persistent gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN). This occurs in approximately 15 to 20 percent of complete molar pregnancies, and up to 5 percent of partial molar pregnancies.
One sign of persistent GTN is a high level of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) — a pregnancy hormone — after the molar pregnancy has been removed. In some cases, an invasive hydatidiform mole penetrates deep into the middle layer of the uterine wall, which causes vaginal bleeding.
Persistent GTN can nearly always be successfully treated, most often with chemotherapy. Another treatment option is removal of the uterus (hysterectomy).
Rarely, a cancerous form of GTN known as choriocarcinoma develops and spreads to other organs. Choriocarcinoma is usually successfully treated with multiple cancer drugs. A complete molar pregnancy is more likely to have this complication than a partial molar pregnancy.
Mold allergy causes the same signs and symptoms that occur in other types of upper respiratory allergies. Signs and symptoms of allergic rhinitis caused by mold allergy can include: Sneezing, Runny or stuffy nose, Cough and postnasal drip, Itchy eyes, nose and throat, Watery eyes, Dry, scaly skin.
Mold allergy symptoms vary from person to person and range from mild to severe. You may have year-round symptoms or symptoms that flare up only during certain times of the year. You may notice symptoms when the weather is damp or when you're in indoor or outdoor spaces that have high concentrations of mold.
If you have a mold allergy and asthma, your asthma symptoms may be triggered by exposure to mold spores. In some people, exposure to certain molds can cause a severe asthma attack. Signs and symptoms of asthma include: Coughing, Wheezing, Shortness of breath, Chest tightness.
If you have a stuffy nose, sneezing, watery eyes, shortness of breath, wheezing or other bothersome symptoms that persist, see your doctor.
Like any allergy, mold allergy symptoms are triggered by an overly sensitive immune system response. When you inhale tiny, airborne mold spores, your body recognizes them as foreign invaders and develops allergy-causing antibodies to fight them.
After the exposure has passed, you still produce antibodies that "remember" this invader so that any later contact with the mold causes your immune system to react. This reaction triggers the release of substances such as histamine, which cause itchy, watery eyes, runny nose, sneezing and other mold allergy symptoms.
Molds are very common both inside and outside. There are many types, but only certain kinds of mold cause allergies. Being allergic to one type of mold doesn't necessarily mean you'll be allergic to another. Some of the most common molds that cause allergies include alternaria, aspergillus, cladosporium and penicillium.
A number of factors can make you more likely to develop a mold allergy or worsen your existing mold allergy symptoms, including:
Having a family history of allergies. If allergies and asthma run in your family, you're more likely to develop a mold allergy.
Working in an occupation that exposes you to mold. Occupations where mold exposure may be high include farming, dairy work, logging, baking, millwork, carpentry, greenhouse work, winemaking and furniture repair.
Living in a house with high humidity. If your indoor humidity is higher than 50 percent, you may have increased exposure to mold in your home.
Mold can grow virtually anywhere if the conditions are right — in basements, behind walls in framing, on soap-coated grout and other damp surfaces, in carpet pads, and in the carpet itself. Exposure to high levels of household mold may trigger mold allergy symptoms.
Working or living in a building that's been exposed to excess moisture. Examples include leaky pipes, water seepage during rainstorms and flood damage. At some point, nearly every building has some kind of excessive moisture. This moisture can allow mold to flourish.
Living in a house with poor ventilation. Tight window and door seals may trap moisture indoors and prevent proper ventilation, creating ideal conditions for mold growth. Damp areas — such as bathrooms, kitchens and basements — are most vulnerable.
Most allergic responses to mold involve hay fever-type symptoms that can make you miserable but aren't serious. However, certain allergic conditions caused by mold are more severe. These include:
Mold-induced asthma. In people allergic to mold, breathing in spores can trigger an asthma flare-up. If you have a mold allergy and asthma, be sure you have an emergency plan in place in case of a severe asthma attack.
Allergic fungal sinusitis. This results from an inflammatory reaction to fungus in the sinuses.
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. This reaction to fungus in the lungs can occur in people with asthma or cystic fibrosis.
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis. This rare condition occurs when exposure to airborne particles such as mold spores causes the lungs to become inflamed. It may be triggered by exposure to allergy-causing dust at work.
Besides allergens, mold may pose other health risks to susceptible people. For example, mold may cause infections of the skin or mucous membranes. Generally, however, mold doesn't cause systemic infections except for people with impaired immune systems, such as those who have HIV/AIDS or who are taking immunosuppressant medication.
The typical mole is a brown spot. But moles come in different colors, shapes and sizes:
Color and texture. Moles can be brown, tan, black, red, blue or pink. They can be smooth, wrinkled, flat or raised. They may have hair growing from them.
Shape. Most moles are oval or round.
Size. Moles are usually less than 1/4 inch (about 6 millimeters) in diameter — the size of a pencil eraser. Rarely, moles present at birth (congenital nevi) can be much bigger, covering wide areas of the face, torso or a limb.
Moles can develop anywhere on your body, including your scalp, armpits, under your nails, and between your fingers and toes. Most people have 10 to 40 moles. Many of these develop by age 50. Moles may change in appearance or fade away over time. Hormonal changes of adolescence and pregnancy may cause moles to become darker and larger.
This ABCDE guide can help you determine if a mole or a spot may indicate melanoma or other skin cancers:
A is for asymmetrical shape. One half is unlike the other half.
B is for border. Look for moles with irregular, notched or scalloped borders.
C is for color. Look for growths that have changed color, have many colors or have uneven color.
D is for diameter. Look for new growth in a mole larger than 1/4 inch (about 6 millimeters).
E is for evolving. Watch for moles that change in size, shape, color or height, especially if part or all of a mole turns black. Moles may also evolve to develop new signs and symptoms, such as itchiness or bleeding.
Cancerous (malignant) moles vary greatly in appearance. Some may show all of the features listed above. Others may have only one or two.
Make an appointment with your doctor if a mole looks unusual, grows or changes.
Moles are caused when cells in the skin (melanocytes) grow in clusters or clumps. Melanocytes are distributed throughout your skin and produce melanin, the natural pigment that gives your skin its color.
Melanoma is the main complication of moles. Some people have a higher than average risk of their moles becoming cancerous and developing into melanoma. Factors that increase your risk of melanoma include:
Being born with large moles. These types of moles are called congenital nevi. On an infant, such moles are classified as large if they're more than 2 inches (5 centimeters) in diameter. Even a large mole seldom becomes cancerous and almost never before the child reaches puberty.
Having unusual moles. Moles that are bigger than a common mole and irregular in shape are known as atypical (dysplastic) nevi. They tend to be hereditary. And they often have dark brown centers and lighter, uneven borders.
Having many moles. Having more than 50 ordinary moles indicates an increased risk of melanoma. Two studies add to the evidence that the number of your moles predict cancer risk. One showed that people under 50 years old who have 20 or more moles on their arms are at increased risk of melanoma. Another showed a relationship between the number of women's moles and breast cancer risk.
Having a personal or family history of melanoma. If you've had melanoma before, you are at increased risk of a mole becoming cancerous. In addition, some types of atypical moles lead to a genetic form of melanoma.
Signs and symptoms of molluscum contagiosum include bumps on the skin that: Are raised, round and flesh colored, Are small — typically under about 1/4 inch (smaller than 6 millimeters) in diameter, Characteristically have a small indentation (umbilication) or dot at the top near the center, Can become red and inflamed, May be itchy, Can be easily removed by scratching or rubbing, which can spread the virus to adjacent skin, Usually appear on the face, neck, armpits, arms and tops of the hands in children, May be seen on the genitals, lower abdomen and inner upper thighs in adults if the infection was sexually transmitted.
If you suspect you or your child has molluscum contagiosum, consult your primary care doctor.
The virus that causes molluscum contagiosum spreads easily through: Skin-to-skin contact, Contact with contaminated objects, such as towels, Sexual contact with an affected partner, Scratching or rubbing the bumps, which spreads the virus to nearby skin.
It's not clear if the molluscum contagiosum virus can spread in the chlorinated water found in swimming pools. Experts suspect that it's more likely that swimmers transmit the virus through shared use of towels; equipment, such as kickboards; or skin contact.
More widespread molluscum contagiosis infections may occur in people with weakened immune systems.
The bumps and the skin around them may become red and inflamed. This is thought to be an immune response to the infection. If scratched, these bumps can become infected. If lesions appear on the eyelids, pink eye (conjunctivitis) can develop.
People with monoclonal gammopathy generally don't experience signs or symptoms. Some people may experience a rash or nerve problems, such as numbness or tingling. MGUS is usually detected by chance when you have a blood test for another condition.
The precise cause of MGUS isn't known. Genetic changes and environmental triggers appear to play a role.
Factors that increase your risk of developing MGUS include:
Age. The average age at diagnosis is 70 years.
Race. Africans and African Americans are more likely to experience MGUS than are white people.
Sex. MGUS is more common in men.
Family history. You may have a higher risk of MGUS if other people in your family have the condition.
Each year about 1% of people with MGUS go on to develop certain types of blood cancers or other serious diseases such as: Multiple myeloma, Light chain amyloidosis, Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, Lymphoma.
Other complications associated with MGUS include bone fractures, blood clots and kidney problems.
Signs and symptoms of mononucleosis may include: Fatigue, Sore throat, perhaps misdiagnosed as strep throat, that doesn't get better after treatment with antibiotics, Fever, Swollen lymph nodes in your neck and armpits, Swollen tonsils, Headache, Skin rash, Soft, swollen spleen.
The virus has an incubation period of approximately four to six weeks, although in young children this period may be shorter. Signs and symptoms such as a fever and sore throat usually lessen within a couple of weeks, but fatigue, enlarged lymph nodes and a swollen spleen may last for a few weeks longer.
If you've been experiencing the above symptoms, you may have mononucleosis.
If your symptoms don't get better on their own in a week or two, see your doctor.
The most common cause of mononucleosis is the Epstein-Barr virus, but other viruses can also cause similar symptoms.
Although the symptoms of mononucleosis are uncomfortable, the infection resolves on its own without long-term effects. Most adults have been exposed to the Epstein-Barr virus and have built up antibodies. Therefore, they're immune and won't get mononucleosis.
Complications of mononucleosis can occasionally be serious.
Mononucleosis may cause enlargement of the spleen. In extreme cases, your spleen may rupture, causing sharp, sudden pain in the left side of your upper abdomen. If such pain occurs, seek medical attention immediately — you may need surgery.
Problems with your liver also may occur:
Hepatitis. You may experience mild liver inflammation (hepatitis).
Jaundice. A yellowing of your skin and the whites of your eyes (jaundice) also occurs occasionally.
Mononucleosis can also result in the following less common complications: Anemia — a decrease in red blood cells and in hemoglobin, an iron-rich protein in red blood cells, Thrombocytopenia — a low count of platelets, which are blood cells involved in clotting, Heart problems — an inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis), Complications involving the nervous system — meningitis, encephalitis and Guillain-Barre syndrome, Swollen tonsils — which can block breathing.
The Epstein-Barr virus can cause much more serious illness in people who have impaired immune systems, such as people with HIV/AIDS or people taking drugs to suppress immunity after an organ transplant.
Common signs and symptoms of morning sickness include nausea and vomiting, often triggered by certain odors, spicy foods, heat, excess salivation or — often times — no triggers at all. Morning sickness is most common during the first trimester and usually begins by nine weeks after conception. Symptoms improve for most expectant mothers by the mid to late second trimester.
Contact your health care provider if: The nausea or vomiting is severe, You pass only a small amount of urine or it's dark in color, You can't keep down liquids, You feel dizzy or faint when you stand up, Your heart races.
What causes morning sickness isn't clear, but the hormonal changes of pregnancy are thought to play a role. Rarely, severe or persistent nausea or vomiting may be caused by a medical condition unrelated to pregnancy — such as thyroid or liver disease.
Morning sickness can affect anyone who's pregnant, but it might be more likely if: You had nausea or vomiting from motion sickness, migraines, certain smells or tastes, or exposure to estrogen (in birth control pills, for example) before pregnancy, You had morning sickness during a previous pregnancy, You're pregnant with twins or other multiples.
You might be more likely to experience hyperemesis gravidarum if: You're pregnant with a girl, You have a family history of hyperemesis gravidarum, You experienced hyperemesis gravidarum during a previous pregnancy.
Mild nausea and vomiting of pregnancy typically won't cause any complications to you or your baby.
If left untreated, severe nausea and vomiting can cause dehydration, an electrolyte imbalance, decreased urination and hospitalization. Research is mixed on whether hyperemesis gravidarum causes poor weight gain for your baby during your pregnancy.
Signs and symptoms of morphea vary depending on the type and stage of the condition. They include: Reddish or purplish oval patches of skin, often on the belly, chest or back, Patches that gradually develop a lighter or whitish center, Linear patches, especially on the arms or legs and possibly the forehead or scalp, A gradual change in the affected skin, which becomes firm, thickened, dry and shiny.
Morphea affects the skin and underlying tissue and sometimes bone. The condition generally lasts several years and then improves or at times disappears by itself. It may leave scars or areas of darkened or discolored skin. It is possible for morphea to recur.
See your doctor if you notice reddish patches of hardening or thickening skin. Early diagnosis and treatment may help slow the development of new patches and allow your doctor to identify and treat complications before they worsen.
The cause of morphea is unknown. It may be caused by an unusual reaction of your immune system. In people at increased risk of morphea, it could be triggered by injury to the affected area, medications, chemical toxins, an infection or radiation therapy.
The condition isn't contagious.
Certain factors may affect your risk of developing morphea, including:
Being white and female. Morphea is most common in white females.
Age. The condition can affect people at any age. It usually appears between the ages of 2 and 14 or in the mid-40s.
A family history of morphea. This condition can run in families. People with morphea are more likely to have a family history of morphea and other autoimmune diseases.
Morphea can cause a number of complications, including:
Self-esteem issues. Morphea can have a negative effect on your self-esteem and body image, particularly if discolored patches of skin appear on your arms, legs or face.
Movement problems. Morphea that affects the arms or legs can impair joint mobility.
Widespread areas of hardened, discolored skin. Numerous new patches of hardened, discolored skin may seem to join together, a condition known as generalized morphea.
Loss of hair and sweat glands. Over time, you may lose hair and sweat glands in the affected area.
Eye damage. Children with head and neck morphea may experience unnoticeable but permanent eye damage.
Typically, there's no outward sign of this condition, such as a lump. Instead, you may experience the following symptoms: A feeling as if you're standing on a pebble in your shoe, A burning pain in the ball of your foot that may radiate into your toes, Tingling or numbness in your toes.
It's best not to ignore any foot pain that lasts longer than a few days. See your doctor if you experience a burning pain in the ball of your foot that's not improving, despite changing your footwear and modifying activities that may cause stress to your foot.
Morton's neuroma seems to occur in response to irritation, pressure or injury to one of the nerves that lead to your toes.
Factors that appear to contribute to Morton's neuroma include:
High heels. Wearing high-heeled shoes or shoes that are tight or ill fitting can place extra pressure on your toes and the ball of your foot.
Certain sports. Participating in high-impact athletic activities such as jogging or running may subject your feet to repetitive trauma. Sports that feature tight shoes, such as snow skiing or rock climbing, can put pressure on your toes.
Foot deformities. People who have bunions, hammertoes, high arches or flatfeet are at higher risk of developing Morton's neuroma.
Mosquito bite signs include: A puffy, white and reddish bump that appears a few minutes after the bite, A hard, itchy, reddish-brown bump, or multiple bumps, appearing a day or so after the bite or bites, Small blisters instead of hard bumps, Dark spots that look like bruises.
More-severe reactions may be experienced by children, adults not previously exposed to the type of mosquito that bit them, and people with immune system disorders. In these people, mosquito bites sometimes trigger: A large area of swelling and redness, Low-grade fever, Hives, Swollen lymph nodes.
Children are more likely to develop a severe reaction than are adults, because many adults have had mosquito bites throughout their lives and become desensitized.
If mosquito bites seem to be associated with more-serious warning signs — such as fever, headache, body aches and signs of infection — contact your doctor.
Mosquito bites are caused by female mosquitoes feeding on your blood. Female mosquitoes have a mouthpart made to pierce skin and siphon off blood. Males lack this blood-sucking ability because they don't produce eggs and so have no need for protein in blood.
As a biting mosquito fills itself with blood, it injects saliva into your skin. Proteins in the saliva trigger a mild immune system reaction that results in the characteristic itching and bump.
Mosquitoes select their victims by evaluating scent, exhaled carbon dioxide and the chemicals in a person's sweat.
Scratching bites can lead to infection.
Mosquitoes can carry certain diseases, such as West Nile virus, malaria, yellow fever and dengue fever. The mosquito obtains a virus or parasite by biting an infected person or animal. Then, when biting you, the mosquito can transfer that virus or parasite to you through its saliva. West Nile and encephalitis viruses are found in the United States. Dengue fever has been reported in several southern states and Hawaii. Other diseases, such as malaria and yellow fever, are far more common in tropical areas of the world.
Signs and symptoms of mouth cancer may include: A lip or mouth sore that doesn't heal, A white or reddish patch on the inside of your mouth, Loose teeth, A growth or lump inside your mouth, Mouth pain, Ear pain, Difficult or painful swallowing.
Make an appointment with your doctor or dentist if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that bother you and last more than two weeks. Your doctor will likely investigate other more common causes for your signs and symptoms first, such as an infection.
Mouth cancers form when cells on the lips or in the mouth develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The mutations changes tell the cells to continue growing and dividing when healthy cells would die. The accumulating abnormal mouth cancer cells can form a tumor. With time they may spread inside the mouth and on to other areas of the head and neck or other parts of the body.
Mouth cancers most commonly begin in the flat, thin cells (squamous cells) that line your lips and the inside of your mouth. Most oral cancers are squamous cell carcinomas.
It's not clear what causes the mutations in squamous cells that lead to mouth cancer. But doctors have identified factors that may increase the risk of mouth cancer.
Factors that can increase your risk of mouth cancer include: Tobacco use of any kind, including cigarettes, cigars, pipes, chewing tobacco and snuff, among others, Heavy alcohol use, Excessive sun exposure to your lips, A sexually transmitted virus called human papillomavirus (HPV), A weakened immune system.
Moyamoya disease may occur at any age, though symptoms most commonly occur between 5 and 10 years of age in children and between 30 and 50 years of age in adults.
The first symptom of moyamoya disease is usually stroke or recurrent transient ischemic attack (TIA), especially in children. Adults also may experience these symptoms but also experience bleeding in the brain (hemorrhagic stroke) from abnormal brain vessels.
Accompanying signs and symptoms of moyamoya disease related to reduced blood flow to the brain include: Headache, Seizures, Weakness, numbness or paralysis in your face, arm or leg, typically on one side of your body, Visual disturbances, Difficulties with speaking or understanding others (aphasia), Developmental delays, Involuntary movements.
These symptoms can be triggered by exercise, crying, coughing, straining or fever.
Seek immediate medical attention if you notice any signs or symptoms of a stroke or TIA, even if they seem to fluctuate or disappear.
Think "FAST" and do the following: Face. Ask the person to smile. Does one side of the face droop?, Arms. Ask the person to raise both arms. Does one arm drift downward? Or is one arm unable to rise up?, Speech. Ask the person to repeat a simple phrase. Is his or her speech slurred or strange?, Time. If you observe any of these signs, call 911 or emergency medical help immediately..
Call 911 or your local emergency number right away. Don't wait to see if symptoms go away. Every minute counts. The longer a stroke goes untreated, the greater the potential for brain damage and disability.
If you're with someone you suspect is having a stroke, watch the person carefully while waiting for emergency assistance.
The exact cause of moyamoya disease is unknown. Moyamoya disease is most commonly seen in Japan, Korea and China, but it also occurs in other parts of the world. Researchers believe the greater prevalence in these Asian countries strongly suggests a genetic factor in some populations.
Moyamoya is also associated with certain conditions, such as Down syndrome, sickle cell anemia, neurofibromatosis type 1 and hyperthyroidism.
Though the cause of moyamoya disease is unknown, certain factors may increase your risk of having the condition, including:
Being of Asian descent. Moyamoya disease is found all over the world, but it's more common in East Asian countries, especially Korea, Japan and China. This may possibly be due to certain genetic factors in those populations. This same higher prevalence has been documented among Asians living in Western countries.
Having a family history of moyamoya disease. If you have a family member with moyamoya disease, your risk of having the condition is 30 to 40 times higher than that of the general population — a factor that strongly suggests a genetic component.
Having a certain medical condition. Moyamoya disease sometimes occurs in association with another disorder, including neurofibromatosis type 1, sickle cell disease and Down syndrome, among many others.
Being female. Females have a slightly higher incidence of moyamoya disease.
Being young. Though adults can have moyamoya disease, children younger than 15 years old are most commonly affected.
Most complications from moyamoya disease are associated with the effects of stroke, such as:
Vision problems. As a result of stroke, some people with moyamoya disease experience visual disturbances.
Movement disorders. Though rare, involuntary movement of certain muscles occurs in some people with moyamoya disease.
Learning or developmental issues. After a stroke, a child may have problems with mental processing, which can affect schoolwork as well as cause emotional difficulties and low self-esteem.
Staph skin infections, including MRSA, generally start as swollen, painful red bumps that might resemble pimples or spider bites. The affected area might be: Warm to the touch, Full of pus or other drainage, Accompanied by a fever.
These can quickly turn into deep, painful abscesses that require surgical draining. Sometimes the bacteria remain confined to the skin. But they can also burrow deep into the body, causing potentially life-threatening infections in bones, joints, surgical wounds, the bloodstream, heart valves and lungs.
Keep an eye on minor skin problems — pimples, insect bites, cuts and scrapes — especially in children. If wounds appear infected or are accompanied by a fever, see your doctor.
Different varieties of Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, commonly called "staph," exist. Staph bacteria are normally found on the skin or in the nose of about one-third of the population. The bacteria are generally harmless unless they enter the body through a cut or other wound, and even then they usually cause only minor skin problems in healthy people.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, around 2 percent of the population chronically carries the type of staph bacteria known as MRSA.
MRSA is the result of decades of often unnecessary antibiotic use. For years, antibiotics have been prescribed for colds, flu and other viral infections that don't respond to these drugs. Even when antibiotics are used appropriately, they contribute to the rise of drug-resistant bacteria because they don't destroy every germ they target. Bacteria live on an evolutionary fast track, so germs that survive treatment with one antibiotic soon learn to resist others.
Because hospital and community strains of MRSA generally occur in different settings, the risk factors for the two strains differ.
Being hospitalized. MRSA remains a concern in hospitals, where it can attack those most vulnerable — older adults and people with weakened immune systems.
Having an invasive medical device. Medical tubing — such as intravenous lines or urinary catheters — can provide a pathway for MRSA to travel into your body.
Residing in a long-term care facility. MRSA is prevalent in nursing homes. Carriers of MRSA have the ability to spread it, even if they're not sick themselves.
Participating in contact sports. MRSA can spread easily through cuts and abrasions and skin-to-skin contact.
Living in crowded or unsanitary conditions. Outbreaks of MRSA have occurred in military training camps, child care centers and jails.
Men having sex with men. Homosexual men have a higher risk of developing MRSA infections.
Using intravenous drugs. People who inject drugs are an estimated 16.3 times more likely to develop invasive MRSA infections than others.
MRSA infections can resist the effects of many common antibiotics, so they are more difficult to treat. This can allow the infections to spread and sometimes become life-threatening.
MRSA infections may affect your: Bloodstream, Lungs, Heart, Bones, Joints.
Symptoms of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, or MEN 1, include tiredness, bone pain, broken bones, kidney stones, and ulcers in the stomach or intestines. Symptoms are caused by the release of too many hormones in the body.
Signs and symptoms of multiple myeloma can vary and, early in the disease, there may be none.
When signs and symptoms do occur, they can include: Bone pain, especially in your spine or chest, Nausea, Constipation, Loss of appetite, Mental fogginess or confusion, Fatigue, Frequent infections, Weight loss, Weakness or numbness in your legs, Excessive thirst.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes myeloma.
Doctors know that myeloma begins with one abnormal plasma cell in your bone marrow — the soft, blood-producing tissue that fills in the center of most of your bones. The abnormal cell multiplies rapidly.
Because cancer cells don't mature and then die as normal cells do, they accumulate, eventually overwhelming the production of healthy cells. In the bone marrow, myeloma cells crowd out healthy blood cells, leading to fatigue and an inability to fight infections.
The myeloma cells continue trying to produce antibodies, as healthy plasma cells do, but the myeloma cells produce abnormal antibodies that the body can't use. Instead, the abnormal antibodies (monoclonal proteins, or M proteins) build up in the body and cause problems such as damage to the kidneys. Cancer cells can also cause damage to the bones that increases the risk of broken bones.
Multiple myeloma almost always starts out as a relatively benign condition called monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS).
MGUS, like multiple myeloma, is marked by the presence of M proteins — produced by abnormal plasma cells — in your blood. However, in MGUS, the levels of M proteins are lower and no damage to the body occurs.
Factors that may increase your risk of multiple myeloma include:
Increasing age. Your risk of multiple myeloma increases as you age, with most people diagnosed in their mid-60s.
Male sex. Men are more likely to develop the disease than are women.
Black race. Black people are more likely to develop multiple myeloma than are people of other races.
Family history of multiple myeloma. If a brother, sister or parent has multiple myeloma, you have an increased risk of the disease.
Personal history of a monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS). Multiple myeloma almost always starts out as MGUS, so having this condition increases your risk.
Complications of multiple myeloma include:
Frequent infections. Myeloma cells inhibit your body's ability to fight infections.
Bone problems. Multiple myeloma can also affect your bones, leading to bone pain, thinning bones and broken bones.
Reduced kidney function. Multiple myeloma may cause problems with kidney function, including kidney failure.
Low red blood cell count (anemia). As myeloma cells crowd out normal blood cells, multiple myeloma can also cause anemia and other blood problems.
Multiple sclerosis signs and symptoms may differ greatly from person to person and over the course of the disease depending on the location of affected nerve fibers. Symptoms often affect movement, such as: Numbness or weakness in one or more limbs that typically occurs on one side of your body at a time, or your legs and trunk, Electric-shock sensations that occur with certain neck movements, especially bending the neck forward (Lhermitte sign), Tremor, lack of coordination or unsteady gait.
Vision problems are also common, including: Partial or complete loss of vision, usually in one eye at a time, often with pain during eye movement, Prolonged double vision, Blurry vision.
Multiple sclerosis symptoms may also include: Slurred speech, Fatigue, Dizziness, Tingling or pain in parts of your body, Problems with sexual, bowel and bladder function.
See a doctor if you experience any of the above symptoms for unknown reasons.
Most people with MS have a relapsing-remitting disease course. They experience periods of new symptoms or relapses that develop over days or weeks and usually improve partially or completely. These relapses are followed by quiet periods of disease remission that can last months or even years.
Small increases in body temperature can temporarily worsen signs and symptoms of MS, but these aren't considered true disease relapses.
At least 50% of those with relapsing-remitting MS eventually develop a steady progression of symptoms, with or without periods of remission, within 10 to 20 years from disease onset. This is known as secondary-progressive MS.
The worsening of symptoms usually includes problems with mobility and gait. The rate of disease progression varies greatly among people with secondary-progressive MS.
Some people with MS experience a gradual onset and steady progression of signs and symptoms without any relapses, known as primary-progressive MS.
The cause of multiple sclerosis is unknown. It's considered an autoimmune disease in which the body's immune system attacks its own tissues. In the case of MS, this immune system malfunction destroys the fatty substance that coats and protects nerve fibers in the brain and spinal cord (myelin).
Myelin can be compared to the insulation coating on electrical wires. When the protective myelin is damaged and the nerve fiber is exposed, the messages that travel along that nerve fiber may be slowed or blocked.
It isn't clear why MS develops in some people and not others. A combination of genetics and environmental factors appears to be responsible.
These factors may increase your risk of developing multiple sclerosis:
Age. MS can occur at any age, but onset usually occurs around 20 and 40 years of age. However, younger and older people can be affected.
Sex. Women are more than two to three times as likely as men are to have relapsing-remitting MS.
Family history. If one of your parents or siblings has had MS, you are at higher risk of developing the disease.
Certain infections. A variety of viruses have been linked to MS, including Epstein-Barr, the virus that causes infectious mononucleosis.
Race. White people, particularly those of Northern European descent, are at highest risk of developing MS. People of Asian, African or Native American descent have the lowest risk.
Climate. MS is far more common in countries with temperate climates, including Canada, the northern United States, New Zealand, southeastern Australia and Europe.
Vitamin D. Having low levels of vitamin D and low exposure to sunlight is associated with a greater risk of MS.
Certain autoimmune diseases. You have a slightly higher risk of developing MS if you have other autoimmune disorders such as thyroid disease, pernicious anemia, psoriasis, type 1 diabetes or inflammatory bowel disease.
Smoking. Smokers who experience an initial event of symptoms that may signal MS are more likely than nonsmokers to develop a second event that confirms relapsing-remitting MS.
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) affects many parts of your body. Symptoms typically develop in adulthood, usually in the 50s or 60s.
MSA is classified by two types: parkinsonian and cerebellar. The type depends on the symptoms you have at diagnosis.
This is the most common type of MSA. The signs and symptoms are similar to those of Parkinson's disease, such as: Rigid muscles, Difficulty bending your arms and legs, Slow movement (bradykinesia), Tremors (rare in MSA compared with classic Parkinson's disease), Problems with posture and balance.
The main signs and symptoms are problems with muscle coordination (ataxia), but others may include: Impaired movement and coordination, such as unsteady gait and loss of balance, Slurred, slow or low-volume speech (dysarthria), Visual disturbances, such as blurred or double vision and difficulty focusing your eyes, Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) or chewing.
In addition, the primary sign of multiple system atrophy is: Postural (orthostatic) hypotension, a form of low blood pressure that makes you feel dizzy or lightheaded, or even faint, when you stand up from sitting or lying down.
You can also develop dangerously high blood pressure levels while lying down (supine hypertension).
MSA might cause other difficulties with involuntary (autonomic) body functions, including: Constipation, Loss of bladder or bowel control (incontinence).
Reduced production of sweat, tears and saliva, Heat intolerance due to reduced sweating, Impaired body temperature control, often causing cold hands or feet.
Agitated sleep due to "acting out" dreams, Abnormal breathing at night.
Inability to achieve or maintain an erection (impotence), Loss of libido.
Color changes in hands and feet caused by pooling of blood, Cold hands and feet.
Difficulty controlling emotions, such as laughing or crying inappropriately.
If you develop any of the signs and symptoms associated with multiple system atrophy, see your doctor for an evaluation and diagnosis. If you've already been diagnosed with the condition, contact your doctor if new symptoms occur or if existing symptoms worsen.
There's no known cause for multiple system atrophy (MSA). Some researchers are studying a possible inherited component or involvement of an environmental toxin in the disease process, but there's no substantial evidence to support these theories.
MSA causes deterioration and shrinkage (atrophy) of portions of your brain (cerebellum, basal ganglia and brainstem) that regulate internal body functions, digestion and motor control.
Under a microscope, the damaged brain tissue of people with MSA shows nerve cells (neurons) that contain an abnormal amount of a protein called alpha-synuclein. Some research suggests that this protein may be overexpressed in multiple system atrophy.
The progression of MSA varies, but the condition does not go into remission. As the disorder progresses, daily activities become increasingly difficult.
Possible complications include: Breathing abnormalities during sleep, Injuries from falls caused by poor balance or fainting, Progressive immobility that can lead to secondary problems such as a breakdown of your skin, Loss of ability to care for yourself in day-to-day activities, Vocal cord paralysis, which makes speech and breathing difficult, Increased difficulty swallowing.
People typically live about seven to 10 years after multiple system atrophy symptoms first appear. However, the survival rate with MSA varies widely. Occasionally, people can live for 15 years or longer with the disease. Death is often due to respiratory problems.
Signs and symptoms of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) include those below, though not all children have the same symptoms. Fever that lasts 24 hours or longer, Vomiting, Diarrhea, Pain in the stomach, Skin rash, Feeling unusually tired, Fast heartbeat, Rapid breathing, Red eyes, Redness or swelling of the lips and tongue, Redness or swelling of the hands or feet, Headache, dizziness or lightheadedness, Enlarged lymph nodes.
Severe stomach pain, Difficulty breathing, Bluish lips or face, New confusion, Inability to wake up or stay awake.
If your child has any of the emergency warning signs listed above — or is severely sick with other signs and symptoms — get care immediately. Take your child to the nearest emergency department or call 911 or your local emergency number.
If your child isn't severely ill but shows other signs or symptoms of MIS-C, contact your child's doctor right away for advice. Doctors may want to do tests — such as blood tests, or imaging tests of the chest, heart or abdomen — to check for areas of inflammation and other signs of MIS-C.
The exact cause of MIS-C is not known yet, but it appears to be an excessive immune response related to COVID-19. Many children with MIS-C have a positive antibody test result. This means they've had a recent infection with the COVID-19 virus. Some may have a current infection with the virus.
In the U.S., more Black and Latino children have been diagnosed with MIS-C compared with children of other races and ethnic groups. Studies are needed to help determine why MIS-C affects these children more often than others. Factors may include, for example, differences in access to health information and services as well as the possibility of risks related to genetics.
Most children with MIS-C are between the ages of 3 and 12 years old, with an average age of 8 years old. Some cases have also occurred in older children and in babies.
Many specialists consider MIS-C to be a complication of COVID-19. Without early diagnosis and appropriate management and treatment, MIS-C can lead to severe problems with vital organs, such as the heart, lungs or kidneys. In rare cases, MIS-C could result in permanent damage or even death.
Some people infected with the mumps virus have either no signs or symptoms or very mild ones. When signs and symptoms do develop, they usually appear about two to three weeks after exposure to the virus.
The primary sign of mumps is swollen salivary glands that cause the cheeks to puff out. Other signs and symptoms may include: Pain in the swollen salivary glands on one or both sides of your face, Pain while chewing or swallowing, Fever, Headache, Muscle aches, Weakness and fatigue, Loss of appetite.
See your doctor if you or your child has signs and symptoms of mumps. Mumps is highly contagious for about nine days after symptoms appear. Tell your doctor's office before you go in that you suspect mumps so arrangements can be made to avoid spreading the virus to others in the waiting room.
In the meantime: Rest as much as possible, Try to ease symptoms with cold compresses and over-the-counter pain relievers such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and acetaminophen (Tylenol, others).
Mumps has become uncommon, so it's possible that another condition is causing your signs and symptoms. Swollen salivary glands and a fever could indicate: A blocked salivary gland, A different viral infection.
Mumps is caused by a virus that spreads easily from person to person through infected saliva. If you're not immune, you can contract mumps by breathing in saliva droplets from an infected person who has just sneezed or coughed. You can also contract mumps from sharing utensils or cups with someone who has mumps.
Complications of mumps are rare, but some are potentially serious.
Most mumps complications involve inflammation and swelling in some part of the body, such as:
Testicles. This condition, known as orchitis, causes one or both testicles to swell in males who've reached puberty. Orchitis is painful, but it rarely leads to the inability to father a child (sterility).
Brain. Viral infections such as mumps can lead to inflammation of the brain (encephalitis). Encephalitis can cause neurological problems and become life-threatening.
Membranes and fluid around the brain and spinal cord. This condition, known as meningitis, can occur if the mumps virus spreads through your bloodstream to infect your central nervous system.
Pancreas. The signs and symptoms of this condition, known as pancreatitis, include pain in the upper abdomen, nausea and vomiting.
Other complications of mumps include:
Hearing loss. Hearing loss can occur in one or both ears. Although rare, the hearing loss is sometimes permanent.
Heart problems. Rarely, mumps has been associated with abnormal heartbeat and diseases of the heart muscle.
Miscarriage. Contracting mumps while you're pregnant, especially early in your pregnancy, may lead to miscarriage.
Most muscle cramps develop in the leg muscles, particularly in the calf. Besides the sudden, sharp pain, you might also feel or see a hard lump of muscle tissue beneath your skin.
Muscle cramps usually disappear on their own and are rarely serious enough to require medical care. However, see your doctor if your cramps: Cause severe discomfort, Are associated with leg swelling, redness or skin changes, Are associated with muscle weakness, Happen frequently, Don't improve with self-care, Aren't associated with an obvious cause, such as strenuous exercise.
Overuse of a muscle, dehydration, muscle strain or simply holding a position for a prolonged period can cause a muscle cramp. In many cases, however, the cause isn't known.
Although most muscle cramps are harmless, some may be related to an underlying medical condition, such as:
Inadequate blood supply. Narrowing of the arteries that deliver blood to your legs (arteriosclerosis of the extremities) can produce cramp-like pain in your legs and feet while you're exercising. These cramps usually go away soon after you stop exercising.
Nerve compression. Compression of nerves in your spine (lumbar stenosis) also can produce cramp-like pain in your legs. The pain usually worsens the longer you walk. Walking in a slightly flexed position — such as you would use when pushing a shopping cart ahead of you — may improve or delay the onset of your symptoms.
Mineral depletion. Too little potassium, calcium or magnesium in your diet can contribute to leg cramps. Diuretics — medications often prescribed for high blood pressure — also can deplete these minerals.
Factors that might increase your risk of muscle cramps include:
Age. Older people lose muscle mass, so the remaining muscle can get overstressed more easily.
Dehydration. Athletes who become fatigued and dehydrated while participating in warm-weather sports frequently develop muscle cramps.
Pregnancy. Muscle cramps also are common during pregnancy.
Medical conditions. You might be at higher risk of muscle cramps if you have diabetes, or nerve, liver or thyroid disorders.
Signs and symptoms will vary, depending on the severity of the injury, and may include: Pain or tenderness, Redness or bruising, Limited motion, Muscle spasms, Swelling, Muscle weakness.
Mild strains can be treated at home. See a doctor if your symptoms worsen despite treatment — especially if your pain becomes intolerable, or you experience numbness or tingling.
Acute strains can be caused by one event, such as using poor body mechanics to lift something heavy. Chronic muscle strains can result from repetitive injuries when you stress a muscle by doing the same motion over and over.
Participating in contact sports — such as soccer, football, hockey, boxing and wrestling — can increase your risk of muscle strains.
Certain parts of the body are more susceptible to strains during participation in certain sports. Examples include:
Legs and ankles. Sports that feature quick starts and jumping, such as hurdling and basketball, can be particularly tough on the Achilles tendon in your ankle.
Hands. Gripping sports, such as gymnastics or golf, can increase your risk of muscle strains in your hands.
Elbows. Elbow strains are often caused by throwing sports and racquet sports.
The main sign of muscular dystrophy is progressive muscle weakness. Specific signs and symptoms begin at different ages and in different muscle groups, depending on the type of muscular dystrophy.
This is the most common form. Although girls can be carriers and mildly affected, it's much more common in boys.
Signs and symptoms, which typically appear in early childhood, might include: Frequent falls, Difficulty rising from a lying or sitting position, Trouble running and jumping, Waddling gait, Walking on the toes, Large calf muscles, Muscle pain and stiffness, Learning disabilities, Delayed growth.
Signs and symptoms are similar to those of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, but tend to be milder and progress more slowly. Symptoms generally begin in the teens but might not occur until the mid-20s or later.
Some types of muscular dystrophy are defined by a specific feature or by where in the body symptoms begin. Examples include:
Myotonic. This is characterized by an inability to relax muscles following contractions. Facial and neck muscles are usually the first to be affected. People with this form typically have long, thin faces; drooping eyelids; and swanlike necks.
Facioscapulohumeral (FSHD). Muscle weakness typically begins in the face, hip and shoulders. The shoulder blades might stick out like wings when arms are raised. Onset usually occurs in the teenage years but can begin in childhood or as late as age 50.
Congenital. This type affects boys and girls and is apparent at birth or before age 2. Some forms progress slowly and cause only mild disability, while others progress rapidly and cause severe impairment.
Limb-girdle. Hip and shoulder muscles are usually affected first. People with this type of muscular dystrophy might have difficulty lifting the front part of the foot and so might trip frequently. Onset usually begins in childhood or the teenage years.
Seek medical advice if you notice signs of muscle weakness — such as increased clumsiness and falling — in you or your child.
Certain genes are involved in making proteins that protect muscle fibers. Muscular dystrophy occurs when one of these genes is defective.
Each form of muscular dystrophy is caused by a genetic mutation particular to that type of the disease. Most of these mutations are inherited.
Muscular dystrophy occurs in both sexes and in all ages and races. However, the most common variety, Duchenne, usually occurs in young boys. People with a family history of muscular dystrophy are at higher risk of developing the disease or passing it on to their children.
The complications of progressive muscle weakness include:
Trouble walking. Some people with muscular dystrophy eventually need to use a wheelchair.
Trouble using arms. Daily activities can become more difficult if the muscles of the arms and shoulders are affected.
Shortening of muscles or tendons around joints (contractures). Contractures can further limit mobility.
Breathing problems. Progressive weakness can affect the muscles associated with breathing. People with muscular dystrophy might eventually need to use a breathing assistance device (ventilator), initially at night but possibly also during the day.
Curved spine (scoliosis). Weakened muscles might be unable to hold the spine straight.
Heart problems. Muscular dystrophy can reduce the efficiency of the heart muscle.
Swallowing problems. If the muscles involved with swallowing are affected, nutritional problems and aspiration pneumonia can develop. Feeding tubes might be an option.
Muscle weakness caused by myasthenia gravis worsens as the affected muscle is used. Because symptoms usually improve with rest, muscle weakness can come and go. However, the symptoms tend to progress over time, usually reaching their worst within a few years after the onset of the disease.
Although myasthenia gravis can affect any of the muscles that you control voluntarily, certain muscle groups are more commonly affected than others.
In more than half of people who develop myasthenia gravis, their first signs and symptoms involve eye problems, such as: Drooping of one or both eyelids (ptosis), Double vision (diplopia), which may be horizontal or vertical, and improves or resolves when one eye is closed.
In about 15% of people with myasthenia gravis, the first symptoms involve face and throat muscles, which can:
Impair speaking. Your speech might sound soft or nasal, depending on which muscles have been affected.
Cause difficulty swallowing. You might choke easily, making it difficult to eat, drink or take pills. In some cases, liquids you're trying to swallow come out your nose.
Affect chewing. The muscles used for chewing might wear out halfway through a meal, particularly if you've been eating something hard to chew, such as steak.
Change facial expressions. For example, your smile might look like a snarl.
Myasthenia gravis can also cause weakness in your neck, arms and legs. Weakness in your legs can affect how you walk. Weak neck muscles make it hard to hold up your head.
Talk to your doctor if you have difficulty: Breathing, Seeing, Swallowing, Chewing, Walking, Using your arms or hands, Holding up your head.
Your nerves communicate with your muscles by releasing chemicals (neurotransmitters) that fit precisely into receptor sites on the muscle cells at the nerve-muscular junction.
In myasthenia gravis, your immune system produces antibodies that block or destroy many of your muscles' receptor sites for a neurotransmitter called acetylcholine (as-uh-teel-KOH-leen). With fewer receptor sites available, your muscles receive fewer nerve signals, resulting in weakness.
Antibodies can also block the function of a protein called a muscle-specific receptor tyrosine kinase (TIE-roh-seen KIE-nays). This protein is involved in forming the nerve-muscular junction. Antibodies that block this protein can lead to myasthenia gravis.
The thymus gland is a part of your immune system situated in the upper chest beneath your breastbone. Researchers believe the thymus gland triggers or maintains the production of the antibodies that block acetylcholine.
Large in infancy, the thymus gland is small in healthy adults. In some adults with myasthenia gravis, however, the thymus gland is abnormally large. Some people with myasthenia gravis also have tumors of the thymus gland (thymomas). Usually, thymomas aren't cancerous (malignant), but they can become cancerous.
Some people have myasthenia gravis that isn't caused by antibodies blocking acetylcholine or the muscle-specific receptor tyrosine kinase. This type of myasthenia gravis is called antibody-negative myasthenia gravis. Antibodies against another protein, called lipoprotein-related protein 4, can play a part in the development of this condition.
Rarely, mothers with myasthenia gravis have children who are born with myasthenia gravis (neonatal myasthenia gravis). If treated promptly, children generally recover within two months after birth.
Some children are born with a rare, hereditary form of myasthenia, called congenital myasthenic syndrome. Fatigue, Illness, Stress, Some medications — such as beta blockers, quinidine gluconate, quinidine sulfate, quinine, phenytoin, certain anesthetics and some antibiotics, Pregnancy, Menstrual periods.
Complications of myasthenia gravis are treatable, but some can be life-threatening.
Myasthenic crisis is a life-threatening condition that occurs when the muscles that control breathing become too weak to do their jobs. Emergency treatment is needed to provide mechanical assistance with breathing. Medications and blood-filtering therapies help people to again breathe on their own.
Some people with myasthenia gravis have a tumor in their thymus gland, a gland under the breastbone that is involved with the immune system. Most of these tumors, called thymomas, aren't cancerous (malignant).
People with myasthenia gravis are more likely to have the following conditions:
Underactive or overactive thyroid. The thyroid gland, which is in the neck, secretes hormones that regulate your metabolism. If your thyroid is underactive, you might have difficulties dealing with cold, weight gain and other issues. An overactive thyroid can cause difficulties dealing with heat, weight loss and other issues.
Autoimmune conditions. People with myasthenia gravis might be more likely to have autoimmune conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus.
Myelodysplastic syndromes rarely cause signs or symptoms in the early stages.
In time, myelodysplastic syndromes might cause: Fatigue, Shortness of breath, Unusual paleness (pallor) which occurs due to a low red blood cell count (anemia), Easy or unusual bruising or bleeding which occurs due to a low blood platelet count (thrombocytopenia), Pinpoint-sized red spots just beneath your skin caused by bleeding (petechiae), Frequent infections which occurs due to a low white blood cell count (leukopenia).
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have signs or symptoms that worry you.
In a healthy person, bone marrow makes new, immature blood cells that mature over time. Myelodysplastic syndromes occur when something disrupts this process so that the blood cells don't mature.
Instead of developing normally, the blood cells die in the bone marrow or just after entering the bloodstream. Over time, there are more immature, defective cells than healthy ones, leading to problems such as fatigue caused by anemia, infections caused by leukopenia, and bleeding caused by thrombocytopenia.
Some myelodysplastic syndromes have no known cause. Others are caused by exposure to cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy and radiation, or to toxic chemicals, such as tobacco, benzene and pesticides, or to heavy metals, such as lead.
The World Health Organization divides myelodysplastic syndromes into subtypes based on the type of blood cells — red cells, white cells and platelets — involved.
Myelodysplastic syndrome subtypes include:
Myelodysplastic syndrome with unilineage dysplasia. One blood cell type —white blood cells, red blood cells or platelets — is low in number and appears abnormal under the microscope.
Myelodysplastic syndrome with multilineage dysplasia. In this syndrome, two or three blood cell types are abnormal.
Myelodysplastic syndrome with ring sideroblasts. This type, which has two subtypes, involves a low number of one or more blood cell types. A characteristic feature is that existing red blood cells in the bone marrow contain a ring of excess iron called ring sideroblasts.
Myelodysplastic syndrome associated with isolated del chromosome abnormality. People with this syndrome have low numbers of red blood cells, and the cells have a specific mutation in their DNA.
Myelodysplastic syndrome with excess blasts — types 1 and 2. In both these syndromes, any of the three types of blood cells — red blood cells, white blood cells or platelets — might be low and appear abnormal under a microscope. Very immature blood cells (blasts) are found in the blood and bone marrow.
Myelodysplastic syndrome, unclassifiable. In this uncommon syndrome, there are reduced numbers of one of the three types of mature blood cells, and either the white blood cells or platelets look abnormal under a microscope.
Factors that can increase your risk of myelodysplastic syndromes include:
Older age. Most people with myelodysplastic syndromes are older than 60.
Treatment with chemotherapy or radiation. Chemotherapy or radiation therapy, both of which are commonly used to treat cancer, can increase your risk of myelodysplastic syndromes.
Exposure to certain chemicals. Chemicals linked to myelodysplastic syndromes include tobacco smoke, pesticides and industrial chemicals, such as benzene.
Exposure to heavy metals. Heavy metals linked to myelodysplastic syndromes include lead and mercury.
Complications of myelodysplastic syndromes include:
Anemia. Reduced numbers of red blood cells can cause anemia, which can make you feel tired.
Recurrent infections. Having too few white blood cells increases your risk of serious infections.
Bleeding that won't stop. Lacking platelets in your blood to stop bleeding can lead to excessive bleeding.
Increased risk of cancer. Some people with myelodysplastic syndromes might eventually develop a cancer of the blood cells (leukemia).
Myelofibrosis usually develops slowly. In its very early stages, many people don't experience signs or symptoms.
As disruption of normal blood cell production increases, signs and symptoms may include: Feeling tired, weak or short of breath, usually because of anemia, Pain or fullness below your ribs on the left side, due to an enlarged spleen, Easy bruising, Easy bleeding, Excessive sweating during sleep (night sweats), Fever, Bone pain.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
Myelofibrosis occurs when bone marrow stem cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. The stem cells have the ability to replicate and divide into the multiple specialized cells that make up your blood — red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets.
It's not clear what causes the genetic mutations in bone marrow stem cells.
As the mutated blood stem cells replicate and divide, they pass along the mutations to the new cells. As more and more of these mutated cells are created, they begin to have serious effects on blood production.
The end result is usually a lack of red blood cells — which causes the anemia characteristic of myelofibrosis — and an overabundance of white blood cells with varying levels of platelets. In people with myelofibrosis, the normally spongy bone marrow becomes scarred.
Several specific gene mutations have been identified in people with myelofibrosis. The most common is the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) gene. Knowing whether the JAK2 gene or others are associated with your myelofibrosis helps determine your prognosis and your treatment.
Although the cause of myelofibrosis often isn't known, certain factors are known to increase your risk:
Age. Myelofibrosis can affect anyone, but it's most often diagnosed in people older than 50.
Another blood cell disorder. A small portion of people with myelofibrosis develop the condition as a complication of essential thrombocythemia or polycythemia vera.
Exposure to certain chemicals. Myelofibrosis has been linked to exposure to industrial chemicals such as toluene and benzene.
Exposure to radiation. People exposed to very high levels of radiation have an increased risk of myelofibrosis.
Some people who have myocardial ischemia don't have any signs or symptoms (silent ischemia).
When they do occur, the most common is chest pressure or pain, typically on the left side of the body (angina pectoris). Other signs and symptoms — which might be experienced more commonly by women, older people and people with diabetes — include: Neck or jaw pain, Shoulder or arm pain, A fast heartbeat, Shortness of breath when you are physically active, Nausea and vomiting, Sweating, Fatigue.
Get emergency help if you have severe chest pain or chest pain that doesn't go away.
Myocardial ischemia occurs when the blood flow through one or more of your coronary arteries is decreased. The low blood flow decreases the amount of oxygen your heart muscle receives.
Myocardial ischemia can develop slowly as arteries become blocked over time. Or it can occur quickly when an artery becomes blocked suddenly.
Conditions that can cause myocardial ischemia include:
Coronary artery disease (atherosclerosis). Plaques made up mostly of cholesterol build up on your artery walls and restrict blood flow. Atherosclerosis is the most common cause of myocardial ischemia.
Blood clot. The plaques that develop in atherosclerosis can rupture, causing a blood clot. The clot might block an artery and lead to sudden, severe myocardial ischemia, resulting in a heart attack. Rarely, a blood clot might travel to the coronary artery from elsewhere in the body.
Coronary artery spasm. This temporary tightening of the muscles in the artery wall can briefly decrease or even prevent blood flow to part of the heart muscle. Coronary artery spasm is an uncommon cause of myocardial ischemia.
Chest pain associated with myocardial ischemia can be triggered by: Physical exertion, Emotional stress, Cold temperatures, Cocaine use, Eating a heavy or large meal, Sexual intercourse.
Factors that can increase your risk of developing myocardial ischemia include:
Tobacco. Smoking and long-term exposure to secondhand smoke can damage the inside walls of arteries. The damage can allow deposits of cholesterol and other substances to collect and slow blood flow in the coronary arteries. Smoking causes the coronary arteries to spasm and may also increase the risk of blood clots.
Diabetes. Type 1 and type 2 diabetes are linked to an increased risk of myocardial ischemia, heart attack and other heart problems.
High blood pressure. Over time, high blood pressure can accelerate atherosclerosis, resulting in damage to the coronary arteries.
High blood cholesterol level. Cholesterol is a major part of the deposits that can narrow your coronary arteries. A high level of "bad" (low-density lipoprotein, or LDL) cholesterol in your blood may be due to an inherited condition or a diet high in saturated fats and cholesterol.
High blood triglyceride level. Triglycerides, another type of blood fat, also may contribute to atherosclerosis.
Obesity. Obesity is associated with diabetes, high blood pressure and high blood cholesterol levels.
Waist circumference. A waist measurement of more than 35 inches (89 centimeters) for women and 40 inches (102 cm) in men increases the risk of high blood pressure, diabetes, and heart disease.
Lack of physical activity. Not getting enough exercise contributes to obesity and is linked to higher cholesterol and triglyceride levels. People who get regular aerobic exercise have better heart health, which is associated with a lower risk of myocardial ischemia and heart attack. Exercise also reduces blood pressure.
Myocardial ischemia can lead to serious complications, including:
Heart attack. If a coronary artery becomes completely blocked, the lack of blood and oxygen can lead to a heart attack that destroys part of the heart muscle. The damage can be serious and sometimes fatal.
Irregular heart rhythm (arrhythmia). An abnormal heart rhythm can weaken your heart and may be life-threatening.
Heart failure. Over time, repeated episodes of ischemia may lead to heart failure.
If you have a mild case of myocarditis or are in the early stages, you might have no symptoms or mild ones, such as chest pain or shortness of breath.
In serious cases, the signs and symptoms of myocarditis vary, depending on the cause of the disease. Common myocarditis signs and symptoms include: Chest pain, Rapid or abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias), Shortness of breath, at rest or during physical activity, Fluid retention with swelling of your legs, ankles and feet, Fatigue, Other signs and symptoms of a viral infection, such as a headache, body aches, joint pain, fever, a sore throat or diarrhea.
When children develop myocarditis, they might have signs and symptoms including: Fever, Fainting, Breathing difficulties, Rapid breathing, Rapid or abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias).
Contact your doctor if you have symptoms of myocarditis, particularly chest pain and shortness of breath. If you've had an infection, be alert for the symptoms of myocarditis and let your doctor know if they occur. If you have severe symptoms, go to the emergency room or call for emergency medical help.
Often, the cause of myocarditis isn't identified. Potential causes are many, but the likelihood of developing myocarditis is rare. Potential causes include:
Viruses. Many viruses are commonly associated with myocarditis, including the viruses that cause the common cold (adenovirus); COVID-19; hepatitis B and C; parvovirus, which causes a mild rash, usually in children (fifth disease); and herpes simplex virus.
Gastrointestinal infections (echoviruses), mononucleosis (Epstein-Barr virus) and German measles (rubella) also can cause myocarditis. It's also common in people with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
Bacteria. Numerous bacteria can cause myocarditis, including staphylococcus, streptococcus, the bacterium that causes diphtheria and the tick-borne bacterium responsible for Lyme disease.
Parasites. Among these are such parasites as Trypanosoma cruzi and toxoplasma, including some that are transmitted by insects and can cause a condition called Chagas disease. This disease is much more prevalent in Central and South America than in the United States, but it can occur in travelers and in immigrants from that part of the world.
Fungi. Yeast infections, such as candida; molds, such as aspergillus; and other fungi, such as histoplasma, often found in bird droppings, can sometimes cause myocarditis, particularly in people with weakened immune systems.
Myocarditis also sometimes occurs if you're exposed to:
Medications or illegal drugs that might cause an allergic or toxic reaction. These include drugs used to treat cancer; antibiotics, such as penicillin and sulfonamide drugs; some anti-seizure medications; and some illegal substances, such as cocaine.
Chemicals or radiation. Exposure to certain chemicals, such as carbon monoxide, and radiation can sometimes cause myocarditis.
Other diseases. These include disorders such as lupus, Wegener's granulomatosis, giant cell arteritis and Takayasu's arteritis.
Severe myocarditis can permanently damage your heart muscle, possibly causing:
Heart failure. Untreated, myocarditis can damage your heart's muscle so that it can't pump blood effectively. In severe cases, myocarditis-related heart failure may require a ventricular assist device or a heart transplant.
Heart attack or stroke. If your heart's muscle is injured and can't pump blood, the blood that pools in your heart can form clots. If a clot blocks one of your heart's arteries, you can have a heart attack. If a blood clot in your heart travels to an artery leading to your brain before becoming lodged, you can have a stroke.
Rapid or abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias). Damage to your heart muscle can cause arrhythmias.
Sudden cardiac death. Certain serious arrhythmias can cause your heart to stop beating (sudden cardiac arrest). It's fatal if not treated immediately.
People with myoclonus often describe their signs and symptoms as jerks, shakes or spasms that are: Sudden, Brief, Involuntary, Shock-like, Variable in intensity and frequency, Localized to one part of the body or all over the body, Sometimes severe enough to interfere with eating, speaking or walking.
If your myoclonus symptoms become frequent and persistent, talk to your doctor for further evaluation and proper diagnosis and treatment.
Myoclonus may be caused by a variety of underlying problems. Doctors often separate the types of myoclonus based on their causes, which helps determine treatment. Types of myoclonus include the following categories.
This type of myoclonus occurs in normal, healthy people and rarely needs treatment. Examples include: Hiccups, Sleep starts, Shakes or spasms due to anxiety or exercise, Infant muscle twitching during sleep or after a feeding.
Essential myoclonus occurs on its own, usually without other symptoms and without being related to any underlying illness. The cause of essential myoclonus is often unexplained (idiopathic) or, in some cases, hereditary.
This type of myoclonus occurs as part of an epileptic disorder.
Muscle jerks that occur as a result of an underlying medical condition, including: Head or spinal cord injury, Infection, Kidney or liver failure, Lipid storage disease, Chemical or drug poisoning, Prolonged oxygen deprivation, Medication reaction, Autoimmune inflammatory conditions, Metabolic disorders.
Nervous system conditions that result in secondary myoclonus include: Stroke, Brain tumor, Huntington's disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia, Corticobasal degeneration, Frontotemporal dementia, Multiple system atrophy.
Signs and symptoms of myofascial pain syndrome may include: Deep, aching pain in a muscle, Pain that persists or worsens, A tender knot in a muscle, Difficulty sleeping due to pain.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you experience muscle pain that doesn't go away. Nearly everyone experiences muscle pain from time to time. But if your muscle pain persists despite rest, massage and similar self-care measures, make an appointment with your doctor.
Sensitive areas of tight muscle fibers can form in your muscles after injuries or overuse. These sensitive areas are called trigger points. A trigger point in a muscle can cause strain and pain throughout the muscle. When this pain persists and worsens, doctors call it myofascial pain syndrome.
Myofascial pain syndrome is caused by a stimulus, such as muscle tightness, that sets off trigger points in your muscles. Factors that may increase your risk of muscle trigger points include:
Muscle injury. An acute muscle injury or continual muscle stress may lead to the development of trigger points. For example, a spot within or near a strained muscle may become a trigger point. Repetitive motions and poor posture also may increase your risk.
Stress and anxiety. People who frequently experience stress and anxiety may be more likely to develop trigger points in their muscles. One theory holds that these people may be more likely to clench their muscles, a form of repeated strain that leaves muscles susceptible to trigger points.
Complications associated with myofascial pain syndrome may include:
Sleep problems. Signs and symptoms of myofascial pain syndrome may make it difficult to sleep at night. You may have trouble finding a comfortable sleep position. And if you move at night, you might hit a trigger point and awaken.
Fibromyalgia. Some research suggests that myofascial pain syndrome may develop into fibromyalgia in some people. Fibromyalgia is a chronic condition that features widespread pain. It's believed that the brains of people with fibromyalgia become more sensitive to pain signals over time. Some doctors believe myofascial pain syndrome may play a role in starting this process.
Naegleria infection causes a disease called primary amebic meningoencephalitis (muh-ning-go-un-sef-uh-LIE-tis). This disease causes brain inflammation and destruction of brain tissue.
Generally beginning within two to 15 days of exposure to the amoeba, signs and symptoms of naegleria infection may include: A change in the sense of smell or taste, Fever, Sudden, severe headache, Stiff neck, Sensitivity to light, Nausea and vomiting, Confusion, Loss of balance, Sleepiness, Seizures, Hallucinations.
These signs and symptoms can progress rapidly. They typically lead to death within a week.
Seek immediate medical attention if you develop a sudden onset of fever, headache, stiff neck and vomiting, particularly if you have recently been in warm, fresh water.
Naegleria infection is caused by the Naegleria fowleri amoeba, which is commonly found in warm bodies of fresh water around the world, usually during the summer months. The amoeba is also sometimes found in soil. The amoeba enters your body through your nose, via contaminated water or dust, and travels to your brain through the nerves that transmit your sense of smell.
Only a tiny percentage of the millions of people who are exposed to Naegleria fowleri ever get sick from it. Why some people become infected after exposure and others don't isn't known.
The amoeba isn't spread from person to person or by drinking contaminated water. And properly cleaned and disinfected swimming pools don't contain the naegleria amoeba.
In the United States, millions of people are exposed to the amoeba that causes naegleria infection each year, but few people get sick from it. From 2007 to 2017, 40 infections were reported.
Some factors that might increase your risk of naegleria infection include:
Freshwater swimming. Most people who become ill have been swimming in a freshwater lake within the previous two weeks.
Heat waves. The amoeba thrives in warm or hot water.
Age. Children and young adults are the most likely age groups to be affected, possibly because they're likely to stay in the water longer and are more active in the water.
You may have nail fungus if one or more of your nails are: Thickened, Whitish to yellow-brown discoloration, Brittle, crumbly or ragged, Distorted in shape, A dark color, caused by debris building up under your nail, Smelling slightly foul.
Nail fungus can affect fingernails, but it's more common in toenails.
You may want to see a physician if self-care steps haven't helped and the nail becomes increasingly discolored, thickened or deformed. Also see a doctor if you have diabetes and think you're developing nail fungus.
Fungal nail infections are caused by various fungal organisms (fungi). The most common cause is a type of fungus called dermatophyte. Yeast and molds also can cause nail infections.
Fungal nail infection can develop in people at any age, but it's more common in older adults. As the nail ages, it can become brittle and dry. The resulting cracks in the nails allow fungi to enter. Other factors — such as reduced blood circulation to the feet and a weakened immune system — also may play a role.
Toenail fungal infection can start from athlete's foot (foot fungus), and it can spread from one nail to another. But it is uncommon to get an infection from someone else.
Factors that can increase your risk of developing nail fungus include: Being older, owing to reduced blood flow, more years of exposure to fungi and slower growing nails, Sweating heavily, Having a history of athlete's foot, Walking barefoot in damp communal areas, such as swimming pools, gyms and shower rooms, Having a minor skin or nail injury or a skin condition, such as psoriasis, Having diabetes, circulation problems or a weakened immune system.
A severe case of nail fungus can be painful and may cause permanent damage to your nails. And it may lead to other serious infections that spread beyond your feet if you have a suppressed immune system due to medication, diabetes or other conditions.
If you have diabetes, you may have reduced blood circulation and nerve supply in your feet. You're also at greater risk of a bacterial skin infection (cellulitis). So any relatively minor injury to your feet — including a nail fungal infection — can lead to a more serious complication. See your doctor if you have diabetes and think you're developing nail fungus.
Signs and symptoms of narcissistic personality disorder and the severity of symptoms vary. People with the disorder can: Have an exaggerated sense of self-importance, Have a sense of entitlement and require constant, excessive admiration, Expect to be recognized as superior even without achievements that warrant it, Exaggerate achievements and talents, Be preoccupied with fantasies about success, power, brilliance, beauty or the perfect mate, Believe they are superior and can only associate with equally special people, Monopolize conversations and belittle or look down on people they perceive as inferior, Expect special favors and unquestioning compliance with their expectations, Take advantage of others to get what they want, Have an inability or unwillingness to recognize the needs and feelings of others, Be envious of others and believe others envy them, Behave in an arrogant or haughty manner, coming across as conceited, boastful and pretentious, Insist on having the best of everything — for instance, the best car or office.
At the same time, people with narcissistic personality disorder have trouble handling anything they perceive as criticism, and they can: Become impatient or angry when they don't receive special treatment, Have significant interpersonal problems and easily feel slighted, React with rage or contempt and try to belittle the other person to make themselves appear superior, Have difficulty regulating emotions and behavior, Experience major problems dealing with stress and adapting to change, Feel depressed and moody because they fall short of perfection, Have secret feelings of insecurity, shame, vulnerability and humiliation.
People with narcissistic personality disorder may not want to think that anything could be wrong, so they may be unlikely to seek treatment. If they do seek treatment, it's more likely to be for symptoms of depression, drug or alcohol use, or another mental health problem. But perceived insults to self-esteem may make it difficult to accept and follow through with treatment.
If you recognize aspects of your personality that are common to narcissistic personality disorder or you're feeling overwhelmed by sadness, consider reaching out to a trusted doctor or mental health provider. Getting the right treatment can help make your life more rewarding and enjoyable.
It's not known what causes narcissistic personality disorder. As with personality development and with other mental health disorders, the cause of narcissistic personality disorder is likely complex. Narcissistic personality disorder may be linked to: Environment ― mismatches in parent-child relationships with either excessive adoration or excessive criticism that is poorly attuned to the child's experience, Genetics ― inherited characteristics, Neurobiology — the connection between the brain and behavior and thinking.
Narcissistic personality disorder affects more males than females, and it often begins in the teens or early adulthood. Keep in mind that, although some children may show traits of narcissism, this may simply be typical of their age and doesn't mean they'll go on to develop narcissistic personality disorder.
Although the cause of narcissistic personality disorder isn't known, some researchers think that in biologically vulnerable children, parenting styles that are overprotective or neglectful may have an impact. Genetics and neurobiology also may play a role in development of narcissistic personality disorder.
Complications of narcissistic personality disorder, and other conditions that can occur along with it, can include: Relationship difficulties, Problems at work or school, Depression and anxiety, Physical health problems, Drug or alcohol misuse, Suicidal thoughts or behavior.
The signs and symptoms of narcolepsy may worsen for the first few years and then continue for life. They include:
Excessive daytime sleepiness. People with narcolepsy fall asleep without warning, anywhere, anytime. For example, you may be working or talking with friends and suddenly you nod off, sleeping for a few minutes up to a half-hour. When you awaken, you feel refreshed, but eventually you get sleepy again.
You may also experience decreased alertness and focus throughout the day. Excessive daytime sleepiness usually is the first symptom to appear and is often the most troublesome, making it difficult for you to concentrate and fully function.
Sudden loss of muscle tone. This condition, called cataplexy (KAT-uh-plek-see), can cause a number of physical changes, from slurred speech to complete weakness of most muscles, and may last up to a few minutes.
Cataplexy is uncontrollable and is triggered by intense emotions, usually positive ones such as laughter or excitement, but sometimes fear, surprise or anger. For example, when you laugh, your head may droop uncontrollably or your knees may suddenly buckle.
Some people with narcolepsy experience only one or two episodes of cataplexy a year, while others have numerous episodes daily. Not everyone with narcolepsy experiences cataplexy.
Sleep paralysis. People with narcolepsy often experience a temporary inability to move or speak while falling asleep or upon waking. These episodes are usually brief — lasting a few seconds or minutes — but can be frightening. You may be aware of the condition and have no difficulty recalling it afterward, even if you had no control over what was happening to you.
This sleep paralysis mimics the type of temporary paralysis that normally occurs during a period of sleep called rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. This temporary immobility during REM sleep may prevent your body from acting out dream activity.
Not everyone with sleep paralysis has narcolepsy, however. Many people without narcolepsy experience some episodes of sleep paralysis.
Changes in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. REM sleep is typically when most dreaming happens. REM sleep can occur at any time of the day in people with narcolepsy. People with narcolepsy often transition quickly to REM sleep, usually within 15 minutes of falling asleep.
Hallucinations. These hallucinations are called hypnagogic hallucinations if they happen as you fall asleep and hypnopompic hallucinations if they occur upon waking. An example is feeling as if there is a stranger in your bedroom. These hallucinations may be particularly vivid and frightening because you may not be fully asleep when you begin dreaming and you experience your dreams as reality.
People with narcolepsy may have other sleep disorders, such as obstructive sleep apnea — a condition in which breathing starts and stops throughout the night — restless legs syndrome and even insomnia.
Some people with narcolepsy experience automatic behavior during brief episodes of narcolepsy. For example, you may fall asleep while performing a task you normally perform, such as writing, typing or driving, and you continue to perform that task while asleep. When you awaken, you can't remember what you did, and you probably didn't do it well.
See your doctor if you experience excessive daytime sleepiness that disrupts your personal or professional life.
The exact cause of narcolepsy is unknown. People with type 1 narcolepsy have low levels of the chemical hypocretin (hi-poe-KREE-tin). Hypocretin is an important neurochemical in your brain that helps regulate wakefulness and REM sleep.
Hypocretin levels are particularly low in those who experience cataplexy. Exactly what causes the loss of hypocretin-producing cells in the brain isn't known, but experts suspect it's due to an autoimmune reaction.
It's also likely that genetics play a role in the development of narcolepsy. But the risk of a parent passing this disorder to a child is very low — only about 1 percent.
Research also indicates a possible association with exposure to the swine flu (H1N1 flu) virus and a certain form of H1N1 vaccine that's currently administered in Europe, though it's not yet clear why.
The normal process of falling asleep begins with a phase called non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. During this phase, your brain waves slow considerably. After an hour or so of NREM sleep, your brain activity changes, and REM sleep begins. Most dreaming occurs during REM sleep.
In narcolepsy, however, you may suddenly enter into REM sleep without first experiencing NREM sleep, both at night and during the day. Some of the characteristics of narcolepsy — such as cataplexy, sleep paralysis and hallucinations — are similar to changes that occur in REM sleep, but occur during wakefulness or drowsiness.
There are only a few known risk factors for narcolepsy, including:
Age. Narcolepsy typically begins in people between 10 and 30 years old.
Family history. Your risk of narcolepsy is 20 to 40 times higher if you have a family member who has narcolepsy.
Public misunderstanding of the condition. Narcolepsy may cause serious problems for you professionally and personally. Others might see you as lazy or lethargic. Your performance may suffer at school or work.
Interference with intimate relationships. Intense feelings, such as anger or joy, can trigger signs of narcolepsy such as cataplexy, causing affected people to withdraw from emotional interactions.
Physical harm. Sleep attacks may result in physical harm to people with narcolepsy. You're at increased risk of a car accident if you have an attack while driving. Your risk of cuts and burns is greater if you fall asleep while preparing food.
Obesity. People with narcolepsy are more likely to be overweight. The weight gain may be related to a low metabolism.
Signs and symptoms of nasal and paranasal tumors can include: Difficulty breathing through your nose, Loss of the sense of smell, Nosebleeds, Discharge from your nose, Facial swelling or pain, Watery eyes, A sore or lesion on the roof of your mouth, Vision problems, A lump in your neck, Difficulty opening your mouth.
Talk to your doctor about any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
Nasal and paranasal tumors form when a genetic mutation turns normal, healthy cells into abnormal cells. Healthy cells grow and multiply at a set rate, eventually dying at a set time. Abnormal cells grow and multiply out of control, and they don't die. The accumulating abnormal cells form a mass (tumor).
If the abnormal cells become cancerous, they might invade nearby tissues and separate from an initial tumor to spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.
Factors that may increase the risk of nasal and paranasal tumors include: Smoking and being around people who are smoking, Breathing in air pollution, Long-term exposure to chemicals and irritants in the air at work, such as wood dust, fumes from glue, rubbing alcohol and formaldehyde, and dust from flour, chromium and nickel, Infection with human papillomavirus (HPV), which is a common sexually transmitted infection.
Nasal polyps are associated with irritation and swelling (inflammation) of the lining of your nasal passages and sinuses that lasts more than 12 weeks (chronic sinusitis).
However, it's possible to have chronic sinusitis without nasal polyps.
Nasal polyps themselves are soft and lack sensation, so if they're small, you may not be aware you have them. Multiple growths or a large polyp may block your nasal passages and sinuses.
Common signs and symptoms of chronic sinusitis with nasal polyps include: A runny nose, Persistent stuffiness, Postnasal drip, Decreased or absent sense of smell, Loss of sense of taste, Facial pain or headache, Pain in your upper teeth, A sense of pressure over your forehead and face, Snoring, Frequent nosebleeds.
See your doctor if your symptoms last more than 10 days. Symptoms of chronic sinusitis and nasal polyps are similar to those of many other conditions, including the common cold.
Seek immediate medical care or call 911 or your local emergency number if you experience: Serious trouble breathing, Sudden worsening of your symptoms, Double vision, reduced vision or limited ability to move your eyes, Severe swelling around your eyes, Increasingly severe headache accompanied by high fever or inability to tip your head forward.
Scientists don't yet fully understand what causes nasal polyps, why some people develop long-term inflammation, or why irritation and swelling (inflammation) triggers polyps to form in some people and not in others. The swelling occurs in the fluid-producing lining (mucous membrane) of your nose and sinuses.
There's some evidence that people who develop polyps have different immune system responses and different chemical markers in their mucous membranes than do those who don't develop polyps.
Nasal polyps can form at any age, but they're most common in young and middle-aged adults.
Nasal polyps may form anywhere in your sinuses or nasal passages, but they appear most often in an area where sinuses near your eyes, nose and cheekbones all drain through winding passages into your nose.
Any condition that triggers long-term irritation and swelling (inflammation) in your nasal passages or sinuses, such as infections or allergies, may increase your risk of developing nasal polyps.
Conditions often associated with nasal polyps include: Asthma, a disease that causes the airway to swell (inflame) and narrow, Aspirin sensitivity, Allergic fungal sinusitis, an allergy to airborne fungi, Cystic fibrosis, a genetic disorder that results in abnormally thick, sticky fluids in the body, including thick mucus from nasal and sinus linings, Churg-Strauss syndrome (eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis), a rare disease that causes the inflammation of blood vessels, Vitamin D deficiency, which occurs when your body doesn't have enough vitamin D.
Your family history also may play a role. There's some evidence that certain genetic variations associated with immune system function make you more likely to develop nasal polyps.
Nasal polyps can cause complications because they block normal airflow and fluid drainage, and also because of the long-term irritation and swelling (inflammation) underlying their development.
Potential complications include:
Obstructive sleep apnea. This is a potentially serious condition in which you stop and start breathing frequently during sleep.
Asthma flare-ups. Chronic sinusitis can worsen asthma.
Sinus infections. Nasal polyps can make you more susceptible to sinus infections that recur often.
In its early stages, nasopharyngeal carcinoma may not cause any symptoms. Possible noticeable symptoms of nasopharyngeal carcinoma include: A lump in your neck caused by a swollen lymph node, Blood in your saliva, Bloody discharge from your nose, Nasal congestion or ringing in your ears, Hearing loss, Frequent ear infections, Sore throat, Headaches.
Early nasopharyngeal carcinoma symptoms may not always prompt you to see your doctor. However, if you notice any unusual and persistent changes in your body that don't seem right to you, such as unusual nasal congestion, see your doctor.
Cancer begins when one or more genetic mutations cause normal cells to grow out of control, invade surrounding structures and eventually spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body. In nasopharyngeal carcinomas, this process begins in the squamous cells that line the surface of the nasopharynx.
Exactly what causes the gene mutations that lead to nasopharyngeal carcinoma isn't known, though factors, such as the Epstein-Barr virus, that increase the risk of this cancer have been identified. However, it isn't clear why some people with all the risk factors never develop cancer, while others who have no apparent risk factors do.
Researchers have identified some factors that appear to increase your risk of developing nasopharyngeal carcinoma, including:
Sex. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is more common in men than it is in women.
Race. This type of cancer more commonly affects people in parts of China, Southeast Asia and northern Africa. In the United States, Asian immigrants have a higher risk of this type of cancer than do American-born Asians. Inuits in Alaska also have an increased risk of nasopharyngeal cancer.
Age. Nasopharyngeal cancer can occur at any age, but it's most commonly diagnosed in adults between the ages of 30 and 50.
Salt-cured foods. Chemicals released in steam when cooking salt-cured foods, such as fish and preserved vegetables, may enter the nasal cavity, increasing the risk of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Being exposed to these chemicals at an early age may increase the risk even more.
Epstein-Barr virus. This common virus usually produces mild signs and symptoms, such as those of a cold. Sometimes it can cause infectious mononucleosis. The Epstein-Barr virus is also linked to several rare cancers, including nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Family history. Having a family member with nasopharyngeal carcinoma increases your risk of the disease.
Alcohol and tobacco. Heavy alcohol intake and tobacco use can raise your risk of developing nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma complications can include:
Cancer that grows to invade nearby structures. Advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma can cause complications if it grows large enough to invade nearby structures, such as the throat, bones and brain.
Cancer that spreads to other areas of the body. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma frequently spreads (metastasizes) beyond the nasopharynx.
Most people with nasopharyngeal carcinoma have regional metastases. That means cancer cells from the initial tumor have migrated to nearby areas, such as lymph nodes in the neck.
Cancer cells that spread to other areas of the body (distant metastases) most commonly travel to the bones, lungs and liver.
Nearsightedness symptoms may include: Blurry vision when looking at distant objects, The need to squint or partially close the eyelids to see clearly, Headaches caused by eyestrain, Difficulty seeing while driving a vehicle, especially at night (night myopia).
Nearsightedness is often first detected during childhood and is commonly diagnosed between the early school years through the teens. A child with nearsightedness may: Persistently squint, Need to sit closer to the television, movie screen or the front of the classroom, Seem to be unaware of distant objects, Blink excessively, Rub his or her eyes frequently.
If your difficulty clearly seeing things that are far away (distance blur) is pronounced enough that you can't perform a task as well as you wish, or if the quality of your vision detracts from your enjoyment of activities, see an eye doctor. He or she can determine the degree of your nearsightedness and advise you of your options to correct your vision.
Seek emergency medical care if you experience: The sudden appearance of many floaters — tiny specks that seem to drift through your field of vision, Flashes of light in one or both eyes, A curtain-like shadow over your visual field.
These are warnings signs of retinal detachment, which is a rare complication of myopia. Retinal detachment is a medical emergency, and time is critical.
Since it may not always be readily apparent that you're having trouble with your vision, the American Academy of Ophthalmology recommends the following intervals for regular eye exams:
If you're at high risk of certain eye diseases, such as glaucoma, get a dilated eye exam every one to two years, starting at age 40.
If you don't wear glasses or contacts, have no symptoms of eye trouble, and are at a low risk of developing eye diseases, such as glaucoma, get an eye exam at the following intervals: Every five to 10 years in your 20s and 30s, Every two to four years from 40 to 54, Every one to three years from 55 to 64, Every one to two years after age 65.
If you wear glasses or contacts or you have a health condition that affects your eyes, such as diabetes, you'll likely need to have your eyes checked regularly. Ask your eye doctor how frequently you need to schedule your appointments. But, if you notice any problems with your vision, schedule an appointment with your eye doctor as soon as possible, even if you've recently had an eye exam. Blurred vision, for example, may suggest you need a prescription change, or it could be a sign of another problem.
Children need to be screened for eye disease and have their vision tested by a pediatrician, an ophthalmologist, an optometrist or another trained screener at the following ages and intervals. Age 6 months, Age 3 years, Before first grade and every two years during school years, at well-child visits, or through school or public screenings.
Your eye has two parts that focus images:
The cornea is the clear, dome-shaped front surface of your eye.
The lens is a clear structure about the size and shape of an M&M's candy.
In a normally shaped eye, each of these focusing elements has a perfectly smooth curvature, like the surface of a marble. A cornea and lens with such curvature bend (refract) all incoming light to make a sharply focused image directly on the retina, at the back of your eye.
If your cornea or lens isn't evenly and smoothly curved, light rays aren't refracted properly, and you have a refractive error.
Nearsightedness usually occurs when your eyeball is longer than normal or your cornea is curved too steeply. Instead of being focused precisely on your retina, light is focused in front of your retina, resulting in a blurry appearance for distant objects.
In addition to nearsightedness, other refractive errors include:
Farsightedness (hyperopia). This occurs when your eyeball is shorter than normal or your cornea is curved too little. The effect is the opposite of nearsightedness. In adults, both near and distant objects are blurred.
Astigmatism. This occurs when your cornea or lens is curved more steeply in one direction than in another. Uncorrected astigmatism blurs your vision.
Certain risk factors may increase the likelihood of developing nearsightedness, such as:
Genetics. Nearsightedness tends to run in families. If one of your parents is nearsighted, your risk of developing the condition is increased. The risk is even higher if both parents are nearsighted.
Environmental conditions. Some studies support the idea that a lack of time spent outdoors may increase the chances of developing myopia.
Nearsightedness is associated with a variety of complications from mild to severe, such as:
Reduced quality of life. Uncorrected nearsightedness can affect your quality of life. You might not be able to perform a task as well as you wish. And your limited vision may detract from your enjoyment of day-to-day activities.
Eyestrain. Uncorrected nearsightedness may cause you to squint or strain your eyes to maintain focus. This can lead to eyestrain and headaches.
Impaired safety. Your own safety and that of others may be jeopardized if you have an uncorrected vision problem. This could be especially serious if you are driving a car or operating heavy equipment.
Financial burden. The cost of corrective lenses, eye exams and medical treatments can add up, especially with a chronic condition such as nearsightedness. Vision reduction and vision loss also can affect income potential in some cases.
Other eye problems. Severe nearsightedness puts you at an increased risk of retinal detachment, glaucoma, cataracts and myopic maculopathy — damage in the central retinal area. The tissues in long eyeballs are stretched and thinned, causing tears, inflammation, new blood vessels that are weak and bleed easily, and scarring.
Signs and symptoms include: Pain that's often worsened by holding your head in one place for long periods, such as when driving or working at a computer, Muscle tightness and spasms, Decreased ability to move your head, Headache.
Most neck pain improves gradually with home treatment. If not, see your doctor.
Seek immediate care if severe neck pain results from an injury, such as a motor vehicle accident, diving accident or fall.
Contact a doctor if your neck pain: Is severe, Persists for several days without relief, Spreads down arms or legs, Is accompanied by headache, numbness, weakness or tingling.
Your neck is flexible and supports the weight of your head, so it can be vulnerable to injuries and conditions that cause pain and restrict motion. Neck pain causes include:
Muscle strains. Overuse, such as too many hours hunched over your computer or smartphone, often triggers muscle strains. Even minor things, such as reading in bed or gritting your teeth, can strain neck muscles.
Worn joints. Just like the other joints in your body, your neck joints tend to wear down with age. Osteoarthritis causes the cushions (cartilage) between your bones (vertebrae) to deteriorate. Your body then forms bone spurs that affect joint motion and cause pain.
Nerve compression. Herniated disks or bone spurs in the vertebrae of your neck can press on the nerves branching out from the spinal cord.
Injuries. Rear-end auto collisions often result in whiplash injury, which occurs when the head is jerked backward and then forward, straining the soft tissues of the neck.
Diseases. Certain diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, meningitis or cancer, can cause neck pain.
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis can begin days to months after exposure to gadolinium-containing contrast. Some signs and symptoms of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis may include: Swelling and tightening of the skin, Thickening and hardening of the skin, typically on the arms and legs and sometimes on the body, but almost never on the face or head, Skin that may feel "woody" and develop an orange-peel appearance and darkening (excess pigmentation), Burning, itching or severe sharp pains in areas of involvement, Skin thickening that inhibits movement, resulting in loss of joint flexibility, Rarely, blisters or ulcers.
In some people, involvement of muscles and body organs may cause: Muscle weakness, Limitation of joint motion caused by muscle tightening (contractures) in arms, hands, legs and feet, Bone pain, Reduced internal organ function, including heart, lung, diaphragm, gastrointestinal tract, or liver, but direct evidence is often lacking, Yellow plaques on the white surface (sclera) of the eyes, Blood clots.
The condition is generally long term (chronic), but some people may improve. In a few people, it can cause severe disability, even death.
The exact cause of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis isn't fully understood. Exposure to gadolinium-containing contrast agents during magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been identified as a trigger for development of this disease. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommends avoiding gadolinium-containing contrast agents in people with acute kidney injury or chronic kidney disease.
Other conditions that may lead to or promote the disease when severe kidney disease and exposure to gadolinium-containing contrast are present include: Use of high-dose erythropoietin (EPO), a hormone that promotes the production of red blood cells, often used to treat anemia, Recent vascular surgery, Blood-clotting problems, Severe infection.
The highest risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis after gadolinium exposure occurs in people who: Have moderate to severe kidney disease, Have had a kidney transplant, but have compromised renal function, Are receiving hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis, Have acute kidney injury.
This increased risk is thought to be related to the reduced ability of these people's kidneys to remove the contrast agent from the bloodstream.
Signs and symptoms of nephrotic syndrome include: Severe swelling (edema), particularly around your eyes and in your ankles and feet, Foamy urine, a result of excess protein in your urine, Weight gain due to fluid retention, Fatigue, Loss of appetite.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have signs or symptoms that worry you.
Nephrotic syndrome is usually caused by damage to the clusters of tiny blood vessels (glomeruli) of your kidneys.
The glomeruli filter your blood as it passes through your kidneys, separating things your body needs from those it doesn't. Healthy glomeruli keep blood protein (mainly albumin) — which is needed to maintain the right amount of fluid in your body — from seeping into your urine. When damaged, glomeruli allow too much blood protein to leave your body, leading to nephrotic syndrome.
Many diseases and conditions can cause glomerular damage and lead to nephrotic syndrome, including:
Diabetic kidney disease. Diabetes can lead to kidney damage (diabetic nephropathy) that affects the glomeruli.
Minimal change disease. This is the most common cause of nephrotic syndrome in children. Minimal change disease results in abnormal kidney function, but when the kidney tissue is examined under a microscope, it appears normal or nearly normal. The cause of the abnormal function typically can't be determined.
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Characterized by scarring of some of the glomeruli, this condition can result from another disease, a genetic defect or certain medications or occur for no known reason.
Membranous nephropathy. This kidney disorder is the result of thickening membranes within the glomeruli. The thickening is due to deposits made by the immune system. It can be associated with other medical conditions, such as lupus, hepatitis B, malaria and cancer, or it can occur for no known reason.
Systemic lupus erythematosus. This chronic inflammatory disease can lead to serious kidney damage.
Amyloidosis. This disorder occurs when amyloid proteins accumulate in your organs. Amyloid buildup often damages the kidneys' filtering system.
Factors that can increase your risk of nephrotic syndrome include:
Medical conditions that can damage your kidneys. Certain diseases and conditions increase your risk of developing nephrotic syndrome, such as diabetes, lupus, amyloidosis, reflux nephropathy and other kidney diseases.
Certain medications. Medications that might cause nephrotic syndrome include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and drugs used to fight infections.
Certain infections. Infections that increase the risk of nephrotic syndrome include HIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C and malaria.
Possible complications of nephrotic syndrome include:
Blood clots. The inability of the glomeruli to filter blood properly can lead to loss of blood proteins that help prevent clotting. This increases your risk of developing a blood clot in your veins.
High blood cholesterol and elevated blood triglycerides. When the level of the protein albumin in your blood falls, your liver makes more albumin. At the same time, your liver releases more cholesterol and triglycerides.
Poor nutrition. Loss of too much blood protein can result in malnutrition. This can lead to weight loss, which can be masked by edema. You may also have too few red blood cells (anemia), low blood protein levels and low levels of vitamin D.
High blood pressure. Damage to your glomeruli and the resulting buildup of excess body fluid can raise your blood pressure.
Acute kidney injury. If your kidneys lose their ability to filter blood due to damage to the glomeruli, waste products can build up quickly in your blood. If this happens, you might need emergency dialysis — an artificial means of removing extra fluids and waste from your blood — typically with an artificial kidney machine (dialyzer).
Chronic kidney disease. Nephrotic syndrome can cause your kidneys to lose their function over time. If kidney function falls low enough, you might need dialysis or a kidney transplant.
Infections. People with nephrotic syndrome have an increased risk of infections.
Signs and symptoms of neuroblastoma vary depending on what part of the body is affected.
Neuroblastoma in the abdomen — the most common form — may cause signs and symptoms such as: Abdominal pain, A mass under the skin that isn't tender when touched, Changes in bowel habits, such as diarrhea or constipation.
Neuroblastoma in the chest may cause signs and symptoms such as: Wheezing, Chest pain, Changes to the eyes, including drooping eyelids and unequal pupil size.
Other signs and symptoms that may indicate neuroblastoma include: Lumps of tissue under the skin, Eyeballs that seem to protrude from the sockets (proptosis), Dark circles, similar to bruises, around the eyes, Back pain, Fever, Unexplained weight loss, Bone pain.
Contact your child's doctor if your child has any signs or symptoms that worry you. Mention any changes in your child's behavior or habits.
In general, cancer begins with a genetic mutation that allows normal, healthy cells to continue growing without responding to the signals to stop, which normal cells do. Cancer cells grow and multiply out of control. The accumulating abnormal cells form a mass (tumor).
Neuroblastoma begins in neuroblasts — immature nerve cells that a fetus makes as part of its development process.
As the fetus matures, neuroblasts eventually turn into nerve cells and fibers and the cells that make up the adrenal glands. Most neuroblasts mature by birth, though a small number of immature neuroblasts can be found in newborns. In most cases, these neuroblasts mature or disappear. Others, however, form a tumor — a neuroblastoma.
It isn't clear what causes the initial genetic mutation that leads to neuroblastoma.
Children with a family history of neuroblastoma may be more likely to develop the disease. Yet, familial neuroblastoma is thought to comprise a very small number of neuroblastoma cases. In most cases of neuroblastoma, a cause is never identified.
Complications of neuroblastoma may include:
Spread of the cancer (metastasis). Neuroblastoma may spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body, such as the lymph nodes, bone marrow, liver, skin and bones.
Spinal cord compression. Tumors may grow and press on the spinal cord, causing spinal cord compression. Spinal cord compression may cause pain and paralysis.
Signs and symptoms caused by tumor secretions. Neuroblastoma cells may secrete certain chemicals that irritate other normal tissues, causing signs and symptoms called paraneoplastic syndromes. One paraneoplastic syndrome that occurs rarely in people with neuroblastoma causes rapid eye movements and difficulty with coordination. Another rare syndrome causes abdominal swelling and diarrhea.
Signs and symptoms of neurodermatitis include: An itchy skin patch or patches, Leathery or scaly texture on the affected areas, A raised, rough patch or patches that are red or darker than the rest of your skin.
The condition involves areas that can be reached for scratching — the head, neck, wrists, forearms, ankles, vulva, scrotum or anus. The itchiness, which can be intense, may come and go or be nonstop. You may scratch out of habit and while sleeping.
See your doctor if: You catch yourself repeatedly scratching the same patch of skin, The itch prevents you from sleeping or focusing on your daily routines, Your skin becomes painful or looks infected and you have a fever.
The cause of neurodermatitis is unknown. The persistent rubbing and scratching that characterize the condition may begin with something that simply irritates the skin, such as tight clothing or a bug bite. As you rub or scratch the area, it gets itchier. The more you scratch, the more it itches.
In some cases, neurodermatitis is associated with chronic skin conditions — such as dry skin, eczema or psoriasis. Stress and anxiety can trigger itching too.
Certain factors may affect your risk of neurodermatitis, including:
Your sex and age. Women are more likely to develop neurodermatitis than are men. The condition is most common between ages 30 and 50.
Other skin conditions. People with a personal or family history of dermatitis, eczema, psoriasis or similar skin conditions are more likely to develop neurodermatitis.
Anxiety disorders. Anxiety and stress can trigger the itch of neurodermatitis.
Persistent scratching can lead to a wound, a bacterial skin infection, or permanent scars and changes in skin color. The itch of neurodermatitis can affect your sleep, sexual function and quality of life.
Neuroendocrine tumors don't always cause signs and symptoms at first. The symptoms you might experience depend on the location of your tumor and whether it produces excess hormones.
In general, neuroendocrine tumor signs and symptoms might include: Pain from a growing tumor, A growing lump you can feel under the skin, Feeling unusually tired, Losing weight without trying.
Neuroendocrine tumors that produce excess hormones (functional tumors) might cause: Skin flushing, Diarrhea, Frequent urination, Increased thirst, Dizziness, Shakiness, Skin rash.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
The exact cause of neuroendocrine tumors isn't known. These cancers begin in neuroendocrine cells that have traits similar to those of nerve cells and hormone-producing cells. Neuroendocrine cells are found throughout your body.
Neuroendocrine tumors begin when neuroendocrine cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. The DNA inside a cell contains the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the neuroendocrine cells to multiply rapidly and form a tumor.
Some neuroendocrine tumors grow very slowly. Others are aggressive cancers that invade and destroy normal body tissue or spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.
The risk of neuroendocrine tumors is higher in people who inherit genetic syndromes that increase the risk of cancer. Examples include: Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1 (MEN 1), Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2 (MEN 2), Von Hippel-Lindau disease, Tuberous sclerosis, Neurofibromatosis.
There are three types of neurofibromatosis, each with different signs and symptoms.
Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) usually appears in childhood. Signs are often noticeable at birth or shortly afterward, and almost always by age 10. Signs and symptoms are often mild to moderate, but can vary in severity.
Signs and symptoms include:
Flat, light brown spots on the skin (cafe au lait spots). These harmless spots are common in many people. Having more than six cafe au lait spots is a strong indication of NF1. They are usually present at birth or appear during the first years of life. After early childhood, new spots stop appearing.
Freckling in the armpits or groin area. Freckling usually appears by ages 3 to 5. Freckles are smaller than cafe au lait spots and tend to occur in clusters in skin folds.
Tiny bumps on the iris of the eye (Lisch nodules). These harmless nodules can't easily be seen and don't affect vision.
Soft, pea-sized bumps on or under the skin (neurofibromas). These benign tumors usually develop in or under the skin, but can also grow inside the body. Sometimes, a growth will involve multiple nerves (plexiform neurofibroma). Plexiform neurofibromas, when located on the face, can cause disfigurement. Neurofibromas may increase with age.
Bone deformities. Abnormal bone growth and a deficiency in bone mineral density can cause bone deformities such as a curved spine (scoliosis) or bowed lower leg.
Tumor on the optic nerve (optic glioma). These tumors usually appear by age 3, rarely in late childhood and adolescence, and almost never in adults.
Learning disabilities. Impaired thinking skills are common in children with NF1 but are usually mild. Often there is a specific learning disability, such as a problem with reading or mathematics. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) also is common.
Larger than average head size. Children with NF1 tend to have a larger than average head size due to increased brain volume.
Short stature. Children with NF1 often are below average in height.
Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) is much less common than NF1. Signs and symptoms of NF2 usually result from the development of benign, slow-growing tumors in both ears (acoustic neuromas), which can cause hearing loss. Also known as vestibular schwannomas, these tumors grow on the nerve that carries sound and balance information from the inner ear to the brain.
Signs and symptoms generally appear in the late teen and early adult years, and can vary in severity. Signs and symptoms can include: Gradual hearing loss, Ringing in the ears, Poor balance, Headaches.
Sometimes NF2 can lead to the growth of schwannomas in other nerves of the body, including the cranial, spinal, visual (optic) and peripheral nerves. Signs and symptoms of these schwannomas can include: Numbness and weakness in the arms or legs, Pain, Balance difficulties, Facial drop, Vision problems or the development of cataracts.
This rare type of neurofibromatosis usually affects people after age 20. On average, symptoms appear between ages 25 and 30. Schwannomatosis causes tumors to develop on the cranial, spinal and peripheral nerves — but rarely on the nerve that carries sound and balance information from the inner ear to the brain. Because tumors don't usually grow on both hearing nerves, schwannomatosis doesn't cause the hearing loss experienced by people with NF2.
Symptoms of schwannomatosis include: Chronic pain, which can occur anywhere in your body and can be disabling, Numbness or weakness in various parts of your body, Loss of muscle.
See your doctor if you or your child develops signs or symptoms of neurofibromatosis. The tumors associated with neurofibromatosis are often benign and slow growing. So although it's important to obtain a timely diagnosis, the situation isn't an emergency.
Neurofibromatosis is caused by genetic defects (mutations) that either are passed on by a parent or occur spontaneously at conception. The specific genes involved depend on the type of neurofibromatosis:
NF1. The NF1 gene is located on chromosome 17. This gene produces a protein called neurofibromin that helps regulate cell growth. The mutated gene causes a loss of neurofibromin, which allows cells to grow uncontrolled.
NF2. The NF2 gene is located on chromosome 22, and produces a protein called merlin (also called schwannomin), which suppresses tumors. The mutated gene causes a loss of merlin, leading to uncontrolled cell growth.
Schwannomatosis. So far, two genes are known to cause schwannomatosis. Mutations of the genes SMARCB1 and LZTR1, which suppress tumors, are associated with this type of neurofibromatosis.
The biggest risk factor for neurofibromatosis is a family history of the disorder. About half of people with NF1 and NF2 inherited the disease from the affected parent. People with NF1 and NF2 that don't have affected relatives likely have a new gene mutation.
NF1 and NF2 are both autosomal dominant disorders, which means that any child of a parent with the disorder has a 50 percent chance of inheriting the genetic mutation.
The inheritance pattern for schwannomatosis is less clear. Researchers currently estimate that the risk of inheriting schwannomatosis from an affected parent is about 15 percent.
Complications of neurofibromatosis vary, even within the same family. Generally, complications result from tumor growth distorting nerve tissue or pressing on internal organs.
Complications of NF1 include:
Neurological problems. Learning and thinking difficulties are the most common neurological problems associated with NF1. Uncommon complications include epilepsy and the buildup of excess fluid in the brain.
Concerns with appearance. Visible signs of neurofibromatosis — such as extensive cafe au lait spots, many neurofibromas in the facial area or large neurofibromas — can cause anxiety and emotional distress, even if they're not medically serious.
Skeletal problems. Some children have abnormally formed bones, which can result in bowing of the legs and fractures that sometimes don't heal. NF1 can cause curvature of the spine (scoliosis) that may need bracing or surgery. NF1 is also associated with decreased bone mineral density, which increases the risk of weak bones (osteoporosis).
Vision problems. Sometimes a tumor develops in children on the optic nerve (optic glioma), which can affect vision.
Problems during times of hormonal change. Hormonal changes associated with puberty or pregnancy might cause an increase in neurofibromas. Most women with NF1 have healthy pregnancies but will likely need monitoring by an obstetrician familiar with the disorder.
Cardiovascular problems. People with NF1 have an increased risk of high blood pressure and may develop blood vessel abnormalities.
Breathing problems. Rarely, plexiform neurofibromas can put pressure on the airway.
Cancer. An estimated 3 to 5 percent of people with NF1 develop cancerous tumors. These usually arise from neurofibromas under the skin or from plexiform neurofibromas. People with NF1 also have a higher risk of other forms of cancer, such as breast cancer, leukemia, colorectal cancer, brain tumors and some types of soft tissue cancer. Women with NF1 should start screening for breast cancer at an earlier age than the general population.
Benign adrenal gland tumor (pheochromocytoma). This noncancerous tumor secretes hormones that raise your blood pressure. Surgery is usually needed to remove the pheochromocytoma.
Complications of NF2 include: Partial or total deafness, Facial nerve damage, Vision problems, Small benign skin tumors (skin schwannomas), Weakness or numbness in the extremities, Multiple benign brain tumors or spinal tumors (meningiomas) requiring frequent surgeries.
The pain caused by schwannomatosis can be debilitating and may require surgical treatment or management by a pain specialist.
An allergic reaction (contact dermatitis) usually begins within hours to days after exposure to nickel. The reaction may last as long as two to four weeks. The reaction tends to occur only where your skin came into contact with nickel, but sometimes may appear in other places on your body.
Nickel allergy signs and symptoms include: Rash or bumps on the skin, Itching, which may be severe, Redness or changes in skin color, Dry patches of skin that may resemble a burn, Blisters and draining fluid in severe cases.
If you have a skin rash and don't know how you got it, talk to your doctor. If you've already been diagnosed with nickel allergy and are sure you're reacting to nickel exposure, use the over-the-counter treatments and home remedies your doctor has previously recommended.
However, if these treatments don't help, call your doctor. If you think the area may have become infected, see your doctor right away. Signs and symptoms that might indicate an infection include: Increased redness, Warmth, Pus in the affected area, Pain.
The exact cause of nickel allergy is unknown. As with other allergies, nickel allergy develops when your immune system views nickel as a harmful, rather than harmless substance. Normally, your immune system only reacts to protect your body against bacteria, viruses or toxic substances.
Once your body has developed a reaction to a particular agent (allergen) — in this case, nickel — your immune system will always be sensitive to it. That means anytime you come into contact with nickel, your immune system will respond and produce an allergic response.
Your immune system's sensitivity to nickel may develop after your first exposure or after repeated or prolonged exposure. Sensitivity to nickel may, in part, be inherited.
Common items that may expose you to nickel include: Jewelry for body piercings, Other jewelry, including rings, bracelets, necklaces and jewelry clasps, Watchbands, Clothing fasteners, such as zippers, snaps and bra hooks, Belt buckles, Eyeglass frames, Coins, Metal tools, Cellphones, Keys, Military "dog-tag" ID, Chalk, Medical devices, Laptops or computer tablets, E-cigarettes.
Certain factors may increase your risk of developing a nickel allergy, including:
Having ear or body piercings. Because nickel is common in jewelry, nickel allergy is most often associated with earrings and other body-piercing jewelry containing nickel.
Working with metal. If you work in an occupation that constantly exposes you to nickel, your risk of developing an allergy may be higher than it is for someone who doesn't work with the metal.
In addition, people who have regular exposure to nickel while doing "wet work" — as a result of either sweat or frequent contact with water — may be more likely to develop nickel allergy. These people may include bartenders, people who work in certain food industries and domestic cleaners.
Other people who may have an increased risk of nickel allergy include metalworkers, tailors and hairdressers.
Being female. Females are more likely to have a nickel allergy than are males. This may be because females tend to have more piercings. A recent study found that overweight women seem to have an even higher risk of nickel allergy.
Having a family history of nickel allergy. You may have inherited a tendency to develop a nickel allergy if other people in your family are sensitive to nickel.
Being allergic to other metals. People who have a sensitivity to other metals may also be allergic to nickel.
For some people, using any amount of tobacco can quickly lead to nicotine dependence. Signs that you may be addicted include:
You can't stop smoking. You've made one or more serious, but unsuccessful, attempts to stop.
You have withdrawal symptoms when you try to stop. Your attempts at stopping have caused physical and mood-related symptoms, such as strong cravings, anxiety, irritability, restlessness, difficulty concentrating, depressed mood, frustration, anger, increased hunger, insomnia, constipation or diarrhea.
You keep smoking despite health problems. Even though you've developed health problems with your lungs or your heart, you haven't been able to stop.
You give up social activities. You may stop going to smoke-free restaurants or stop socializing with family or friends because you can't smoke in these situations.
You're not alone if you've tried to stop smoking but haven't been able to stop for good. Most smokers make many attempts to stop smoking before they achieve stable, long-term abstinence from smoking.
You're more likely to stop for good if you follow a treatment plan that addresses both the physical and the behavioral aspects of nicotine dependence. Using medications and working with a counselor specially trained to help people stop smoking (a tobacco treatment specialist) will significantly boost your chances of success.
Ask your health care team to help you develop a treatment plan that works for you or to advise you on where to get help to stop smoking.
Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that keeps you smoking. Nicotine reaches the brain within seconds of taking a puff. In the brain, nicotine increases the release of brain chemicals called neurotransmitters, which help regulate mood and behavior.
Dopamine, one of these neurotransmitters, is released in the reward center of the brain and causes feelings of pleasure and improved mood.
The more you smoke, the more nicotine you need to feel good. Nicotine quickly becomes part of your daily routine and intertwined with your habits and feelings.
Common situations that trigger the urge to smoke include: Drinking coffee or taking breaks at work, Talking on the phone, Drinking alcohol, Driving your car, Spending time with friends.
To overcome your nicotine dependence, you need to become aware of your triggers and make a plan for dealing with them.
Anyone who smokes or uses other forms of tobacco is at risk of becoming dependent. Factors that influence who will use tobacco include:
Age. Most people begin smoking during childhood or the teen years. The younger you are when you begin smoking, the greater the chance that you'll become addicted.
Genetics. The likelihood that you will start smoking and keep smoking may be partly inherited. Genetic factors may influence how receptors on the surface of your brain's nerve cells respond to high doses of nicotine delivered by cigarettes.
Parents and peers. Children who grow up with parents who smoke are more likely to become smokers. Children with friends who smoke are also more likely to try it.
Depression or other mental illness. Many studies show an association between depression and smoking. People who have depression, schizophrenia, post-traumatic stress disorder or other forms of mental illness are more likely to be smokers.
Substance use. People who abuse alcohol and illegal drugs are more likely to be smokers.
Tobacco smoke contains more than 60 known cancer-causing chemicals and thousands of other harmful substances. Even "all natural" or herbal cigarettes have harmful chemicals.
You already know that people who smoke cigarettes are much more likely to develop and die of certain diseases than people who don't smoke. But you may not realize just how many different health problems smoking causes:
Lung cancer and lung disease. Smoking is the leading cause of lung cancer deaths. In addition, smoking causes lung diseases, such as emphysema and chronic bronchitis. Smoking also makes asthma worse.
Other cancers. Smoking increases the risk of many types of cancer, including cancer of the mouth, throat (pharynx), esophagus, larynx, bladder, pancreas, kidney, cervix and some types of leukemia. Overall, smoking causes 30% of all cancer deaths.
Heart and circulatory system problems. Smoking increases your risk of dying of heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease, including heart attacks and strokes. If you have heart or blood vessel disease, such as heart failure, smoking worsens your condition.
Diabetes. Smoking increases insulin resistance, which can set the stage for type 2 diabetes. If you have diabetes, smoking can speed the progress of complications, such as kidney disease and eye problems.
Eye problems. Smoking can increase your risk of serious eye problems such as cataracts and loss of eyesight from macular degeneration.
Infertility and impotence. Smoking increases the risk of reduced fertility in women and the risk of impotence in men.
Complications during pregnancy. Mothers who smoke while pregnant face a higher risk of preterm delivery and giving birth to lower birth weight babies.
Cold, flu and other illnesses. Smokers are more prone to respiratory infections, such as colds, the flu and bronchitis.
Tooth and gum disease. Smoking is associated with an increased risk of developing inflammation of the gum and a serious gum infection that can destroy the support system for teeth (periodontitis).
Smoking also poses health risks to those around you. Nonsmoking spouses and partners of smokers have a higher risk of lung cancer and heart disease compared with people who don't live with a smoker. Children whose parents smoke are more prone to worsening asthma, ear infections and colds.
Niemann-Pick signs and symptoms may include: Clumsiness and difficulty walking, Excessive muscle contractions (dystonia) or eye movements, Sleep disturbances, Difficulty swallowing and eating, Recurrent pneumonia.
The three main types of Niemann-Pick are types A, B and C. The signs and symptoms you experience depend on the type and severity of your condition. Some infants with type A will show signs and symptoms within the first few months of life. Those with type B may not show signs for years and have a better chance of surviving to adulthood. People with type C may not experience any symptoms until adulthood.
See your doctor right away if you or your child develops warning signs of Niemann-Pick.
Niemann-Pick is caused by mutations in specific genes related to how the body metabolizes fat (cholesterol and lipids). The Niemann-Pick gene mutations are passed from parents to children in a pattern called autosomal recessive inheritance. This means that both the mother and the father must pass on the defective form of the gene for the child to be affected.
Niemann-Pick is a progressive disease, and there is no cure. It can occur at any age.
Types A and B are caused by a missing or malfunctioning enzyme called sphingomyelinase. This affects the body's ability to metabolize fat (cholesterol and lipids), resulting in a buildup of fat in cells. This causes cell dysfunction and, over time, cell death. Type A occurs mainly in infants, who show severe, progressive brain disease. There is no cure, so most children do not live beyond their first few years. Type B usually occurs later in childhood and is not associated with primary brain disease. Most people affected with type B survive into adulthood.
Niemann-Pick type C is a rare inherited disease. The genetic mutations of this type cause cholesterol and other fats to accumulate in the liver, spleen or lungs. The brain is eventually affected too.
You're more likely to have a nightmare in the second half of your night. Nightmares may occur rarely or more frequently, even several times a night. Episodes are generally brief, but they cause you to awaken, and returning to sleep can be difficult.
A nightmare may involve these features: Your dream seems vivid and real and is very upsetting, often becoming more disturbing as the dream unfolds, Your dream storyline is usually related to threats to safety or survival, but it can have other disturbing themes, Your dream awakens you, You feel scared, anxious, angry, sad or disgusted as a result of your dream, You feel sweaty or have a pounding heartbeat while in bed, You can think clearly upon awakening and can recall details of your dream, Your dream causes distress that keeps you from falling back to sleep easily.
Nightmares are only considered a disorder if you experience: Frequent occurrences, Major distress or impairment during the day, such as anxiety or persistent fear, or bedtime anxiety about having another nightmare, Problems with concentration or memory, or you can't stop thinking about images from your dreams, Daytime sleepiness, fatigue or low energy, Problems functioning at work or school or in social situations, Behavior problems related to bedtime or fear of the dark.
Having a child with nightmare disorder can cause significant sleep disturbance and distress for parents or caregivers.
Occasional nightmares aren't usually a cause for concern. If your child has nightmares, you can simply mention them at a routine well-child exam. However, consult your doctor if nightmares: Occur frequently and persist over time, Routinely disrupt sleep, Cause fear of going to sleep, Cause daytime behavior problems or difficulty functioning.
Nightmare disorder is referred to by doctors as a parasomnia — a type of sleep disorder that involves undesirable experiences that occur while you're falling asleep, during sleep or when you're waking up. Nightmares usually occur during the stage of sleep known as rapid eye movement (REM). The exact cause of nightmares is not known.
Nightmares can be triggered by many factors, including:
Stress or anxiety. Sometimes the ordinary stresses of daily life, such as a problem at home or school, trigger nightmares. A major change, such as a move or the death of a loved one, can have the same effect. Experiencing anxiety is associated with a greater risk of nightmares.
Trauma. Nightmares are common after an accident, injury, physical or sexual abuse, or other traumatic event. Nightmares are common in people who have post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Sleep deprivation. Changes in your schedule that cause irregular sleeping and waking times or that interrupt or reduce the amount of sleep can increase your risk of having nightmares. Insomnia is associated with an increased risk of nightmares.
Medications. Some drugs — including certain antidepressants, blood pressure medications, beta blockers, and drugs used to treat Parkinson's disease or to help stop smoking — can trigger nightmares.
Substance abuse. Alcohol and recreational drug use or withdrawal can trigger nightmares.
Other disorders. Depression and other mental health disorders may be linked to nightmares. Nightmares can happen along with some medical conditions, such as heart disease or cancer. Having other sleep disorders that interfere with adequate sleep can be associated with having nightmares.
Scary books and movies. For some people, reading scary books or watching frightening movies, especially before bed, can be associated with nightmares.
Nightmares are more common when family members have a history of nightmares or other sleep parasomnias, such as talking during sleep.
Nightmare disorder may cause: Excessive daytime sleepiness, which can lead to difficulties at school or work, or problems with everyday tasks, such as driving and concentrating, Problems with mood, such as depression or anxiety from dreams that continue to bother you, Resistance to going to bed or to sleep for fear you'll have another bad dream, Suicidal thoughts or suicide attempts.
Signs and symptoms of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma may include: Painless, swollen lymph nodes in your neck, armpits or groin, Abdominal pain or swelling, Chest pain, coughing or trouble breathing, Persistent fatigue, Fever, Night sweats, Unexplained weight loss.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
In most cases, doctors don't know what causes non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. In some cases, it's due to a weakened immune system. But it begins when your body produces too many abnormal lymphocytes — a type of white blood cell.
Normally, lymphocytes go through a predictable life cycle. Old lymphocytes die, and your body creates new ones to replace them. In non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, your lymphocytes don't die, but continue to grow and divide. This oversupply of lymphocytes crowds into your lymph nodes, causing them to swell.
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma can begin in the:
B cells. B cells fight infection by producing antibodies that neutralize foreign invaders. Most non-Hodgkin's lymphoma arises from B cells. Subtypes of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma that involve B cells include diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma.
T cells. T cells are involved in killing foreign invaders directly. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma occurs less often in T cells. Subtypes of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma that involve T cells include peripheral T-cell lymphoma and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
Whether your non-Hodgkin's lymphoma arises from your B cells or T cells helps to determine your treatment options.
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma generally involves the presence of cancerous lymphocytes in your lymph nodes. But the disease can also spread to other parts of your lymphatic system. These include the lymphatic vessels, tonsils, adenoids, spleen, thymus and bone marrow. Occasionally, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma involves organs outside of your lymphatic system.
In most cases, people diagnosed with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma don't have any obvious risk factors. And many people who have risk factors for the disease never develop it.
Some factors that may increase the risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma include:
Medications that suppress your immune system. If you've had an organ transplant, you're more susceptible because immunosuppressive therapy has reduced your body's ability to fight new illnesses.
Infection with certain viruses and bacteria. Certain viral and bacterial infections appear to increase the risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Viruses linked to increased non-Hodgkin's lymphoma risk include HIV and Epstein-Barr infection. Bacteria linked to an increased risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma include the ulcer-causing Helicobacter pylori.
Chemicals. Certain chemicals, such as those used to kill insects and weeds, may increase your risk of developing non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. More research is needed to understand the possible link between pesticides and the development of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Older age. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma can occur at any age, but the risk increases with age. It's most common in people 60 or over.
NAFLD usually causes no signs and symptoms. When it does, they may include: Fatigue, Pain or discomfort in the upper right abdomen.
Possible signs and symptoms of NASH and advanced scarring (cirrhosis) include: Abdominal swelling (ascites), Enlarged blood vessels just beneath the skin's surface, Enlarged spleen, Red palms, Yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice).
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have persistent signs and symptoms that cause you concern.
Experts don't know exactly why some people accumulate fat in the liver while others do not. Similarly, there is limited understanding of why some fatty livers develop inflammation that progresses to cirrhosis.
NAFLD and NASH are both linked to the following: Overweight or obesity, Insulin resistance, in which your cells don't take up sugar in response to the hormone insulin, High blood sugar (hyperglycemia), indicating prediabetes or type 2 diabetes, High levels of fats, particularly triglycerides, in the blood.
These combined health problems appear to promote the deposit of fat in the liver. For some people, this excess fat acts as a toxin to liver cells, causing liver inflammation and NASH, which may lead to a buildup of scar tissue in the liver.
A wide range of diseases and conditions can increase your risk of NAFLD, including: High cholesterol, High levels of triglycerides in the blood, Metabolic syndrome, Obesity, particularly when fat is concentrated in the abdomen, Polycystic ovary syndrome, Sleep apnea, Type 2 diabetes, Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), Underactive pituitary gland (hypopituitarism).
NASH is more likely in these groups: Older people, People with diabetes, People with body fat concentrated in the abdomen.
It is difficult to distinguish NAFLD from NASH without further testing.
The main complication of NAFLD and NASH is cirrhosis, which is late-stage scarring in the liver. Cirrhosis occurs in response to liver injury, such as the inflammation in NASH. As the liver tries to halt inflammation, it produces areas of scarring (fibrosis). With continued inflammation, fibrosis spreads to take up more and more liver tissue.
If the process isn't interrupted, cirrhosis can lead to: Fluid buildup in the abdomen (ascites), Swelling of veins in your esophagus (esophageal varices), which can rupture and bleed, Confusion, drowsiness and slurred speech (hepatic encephalopathy), Liver cancer, End-stage liver failure, which means the liver has stopped functioning.
Between 5% and 12% of people with NASH will progress to cirrhosis.
If you have nonallergic rhinitis, you probably have symptoms that come and go year-round. You may have constant symptoms, or symptoms that last only a short time. Signs and symptoms of nonallergic rhinitis may include: Stuffy nose, Runny nose, Sneezing, Mucus (phlegm) in the throat (postnasal drip), Cough.
Nonallergic rhinitis doesn't usually cause itchy nose, eyes or throat — symptoms associated with allergies such as hay fever.
See your doctor if: Your symptoms are severe, You have signs and symptoms that aren't relieved by over-the-counter medications or self-care, You have bothersome side effects from over-the-counter or prescription medications for rhinitis.
The exact cause of nonallergic rhinitis is unknown.
Experts do know that nonallergic rhinitis occurs when blood vessels in your nose expand and fill the nasal lining with blood and fluid. There are several possible causes, including the nerve endings in the nose being hyperresponsive, similar to the way the lungs react in asthma.
Whatever the trigger, the result is the same — swollen nasal membranes, congestion or excessive mucus.
There are many things known to trigger nonallergic rhinitis — some resulting in short-lived symptoms while others cause chronic problems. Nonallergic rhinitis triggers include:
Environmental or occupational irritants. Dust, smog, secondhand smoke or strong odors, such as perfumes, can trigger nonallergic rhinitis. Chemical fumes, such as those you might be exposed to in certain occupations, also may be to blame.
Weather changes. Temperature or humidity changes can trigger the membranes inside your nose to swell and cause a runny or stuffy nose.
Infections. A common cause of nonallergic rhinitis is a viral infection — a cold or the flu, for example.
Foods and beverages. Nonallergic rhinitis may occur when you eat, especially when eating hot or spicy foods. Drinking alcoholic beverages also may cause the membranes inside your nose to swell, leading to nasal congestion.
Certain medications. Some medications can cause nonallergic rhinitis. These include aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), and high blood pressure (hypertension) medications, such as beta blockers.
Nonallergic rhinitis can also be triggered in some people by sedatives, antidepressants, oral contraceptives or drugs used to treat erectile dysfunction. Overuse of decongestant nasal sprays can cause a type of nonallergic rhinitis called rhinitis medicamentosa.
Hormone changes. Hormonal changes due to pregnancy, menstruation, oral contraceptive use or other hormonal condition such as hypothyroidism may cause nonallergic rhinitis.
Sleeping on your back, sleep apnea and acid reflux. Lying on your back at night while you sleep can cause nonallergic rhinitis, as can obstructive sleep apnea or acid reflux.
Factors that may increase your risk of nonallergic rhinitis include:
Exposure to irritants. If you're exposed to smog, exhaust fumes or tobacco smoke — to name a few — you may be at increased risk of developing nonallergic rhinitis.
Being older than age 20. Unlike allergic rhinitis, which usually occurs before age 20, often in childhood, nonallergic rhinitis occurs after age 20 in most people.
Prolonged use of decongestant nasal drops or sprays. Using over-the-counter decongestant nasal drops or sprays (Afrin, Dristan, others) for more than a few days can actually cause more-severe nasal congestion when the decongestant wears off, often called rebound congestion.
Being female. Due to hormonal changes, nasal congestion often gets worse during menstruation and pregnancy.
Occupational exposure to fumes. In some cases nonallergic rhinitis is triggered by exposure to an airborne irritant in the workplace (occupational rhinitis). Some common triggers include construction materials, solvents, or other chemicals and fumes from decomposing organic material such as compost.
Having certain health problems. A number of chronic health conditions can cause or worsen rhinitis, such as hypothyroidism and chronic fatigue syndrome.
Stress. Emotional or physical stress may trigger nonallergic rhinitis in some people.
Complications from nonallergic rhinitis include:
Nasal polyps. These are soft, noncancerous (benign) growths that develop on the lining of your nose or sinuses due to chronic inflammation. Small polyps may not cause problems, but larger ones can block the airflow through your nose, making it difficult to breathe.
Sinusitis. Prolonged nasal congestion due to nonallergic rhinitis may increase your chances of developing sinusitis — an infection or inflammation of the membrane that lines the sinuses.
Middle ear infections. Increased fluid and nasal congestion may lead to middle ear infections.
Interrupted daily activities. Nonallergic rhinitis can be disruptive. You may be less productive at work or school, and you may need to take time off because of symptom flares or doctor visits.
Signs and symptoms of Noonan syndrome vary greatly among individuals and may be mild to severe. Characteristics may be related to the specific gene containing the mutation.
Facial appearance is one of the key clinical features that leads to a diagnosis of Noonan syndrome. These features may be more pronounced in infants and young children, but change with age. In adulthood, these distinct features become more subtle.
Features may include the following:
Eyes are wide-set and down-slanting with droopy lids. Irises are pale blue or green.
Ears are low-set and rotated backward.
Nose is depressed at the top, with a wide base and bulbous tip.
Mouth has a deep groove between the nose and the mouth and wide peaks in the upper lip. The crease that runs from the edge of the nose to the corner of the mouth becomes deeply grooved with age. Teeth may be crooked, the inside roof of the mouth (palate) may be highly arched and the lower jaw may be small.
Facial features may appear coarse, but appear sharper with age. The face may appear droopy and expressionless.
Head may appear large with a prominent forehead and a low hairline on the back of the head.
Skin may appear thin and transparent with age.
Many people with Noonan syndrome are born with some form of heart defect (congenital heart disease), accounting for some of the key signs and symptoms of the disorder. Some heart problems can occur later in life. Some forms of congenital heart disease associated with this disorder include:
Valve disorders. Pulmonary valve stenosis is a narrowing of the pulmonary valve, the flap of tissue that separates the lower right chamber (ventricle) of the heart from the artery that supplies blood to the lungs (pulmonary artery). It's the most common heart problem seen with Noonan syndrome, and it may occur alone or with other heart defects.
Thickening of the heart muscle (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). This is abnormal growth or thickening of the heart muscle that affects some people with Noonan syndrome.
Other structural defects of the heart. The defects can involve a hole in the wall that separates the two lower chambers of the heart (ventricular septal defect), narrowing of the artery that carries blood to the lungs for oxygen (pulmonary artery stenosis), or narrowing of the major blood vessel (aorta) that carries blood from the heart to the body (aortic coarctation).
Irregular heart rhythm. This can occur with or without structural heart abnormalities. Irregular heart rhythm occurs in the majority of people with Noonan syndrome.
Noonan syndrome can affect normal growth. Many children with Noonan syndrome don't grow at a normal rate. Issues may include the following:
Birth weight will likely be normal, but growth slows over time.
Eating difficulties may result in inadequate nutrition and poor weight gain.
Growth hormone levels may be insufficient.
The growth spurt that's usually seen during the teenage years may be delayed. But because this disorder causes bone maturity to be delayed, growth sometimes continues into the late teens.
By adulthood, some people with Noonan syndrome may have normal height, but short stature is more common.
Some common issues can include: An unusually shaped chest often with a sunken sternum (pectus excavatum) or raised sternum (pectus carinatum), Wide-set nipples, Short neck, often with extra folds of skin (webbed neck) or prominent neck muscles (trapezius), Deformities of the spine.
Intelligence isn't affected for most people with Noonan syndrome. However, individuals may have: An increased risk of learning disabilities and mild intellectual disability, A wide range of mental, emotional and behavioral issues that are usually mild, Hearing and vision deficits that may complicate learning.
A common sign of Noonan syndrome is abnormalities of the eyes and eyelids. These may include: Problems with the eye muscles, such as cross-eye (strabismus), Refractive problems, such as astigmatism, nearsightedness (myopia) or farsightedness (hyperopia), Rapid movement of the eyeballs (nystagmus), Cataracts.
Noonan syndrome can cause hearing deficits due to nerve issues or to structural abnormalities in the inner ear bones.
Noonan syndrome can cause excessive bleeding and bruising due to clotting defects or having too few platelets.
Noonan syndrome can cause problems with the lymphatic system, which drains excess fluid from the body and helps fight infection. These problems: May show up before or after birth or develop in the teenage years or adulthood, Can be focused in a particular area of the body or widespread, Most commonly cause excess fluid (lymphedema) on the back of the hands or top of the feet.
Many people, especially males, with Noonan syndrome can have problems with the genitals and kidneys.
Testicles. Undescended testicles (cryptorchidism) are common in males.
Puberty. Puberty may be delayed in both boys and girls.
Fertility. Most females develop normal fertility. In males, however, fertility may not develop normally, often because of undescended testicles.
Kidneys. Kidney problems are generally mild and occur in a fairly small number of people with Noonan syndrome.
People with Noonan syndrome may have skin conditions, which most commonly are: Various problems that affect the color and texture of the skin, Curly, coarse hair or sparse hair.
The signs and symptoms of Noonan syndrome can be subtle. If you suspect you or your child may have the disorder, see your primary care doctor or your child's pediatrician. You or your child may be referred to a geneticist or a cardiologist.
If your unborn child is at risk because of a family history of Noonan syndrome, prenatal tests may be available.
Noonan syndrome is caused by a genetic mutation. These mutations can occur in multiple genes. Defects in these genes cause the production of proteins that are continually active. Because these genes play a role in the formation of many tissues throughout the body, this constant activation of proteins disrupts the normal process of cell growth and division.
The mutations that cause Noonan syndrome can be:
Inherited. Children who have one parent with Noonan syndrome who carries the defective gene (autosomal dominant) have a 50 percent chance of developing the disorder.
Random. Noonan syndrome can develop because of a new mutation in children who don't have a genetic predisposition for the disorder (de novo).
A parent with Noonan syndrome has a 50 percent chance (one chance in two) of passing the defective gene on to his or her child. The child who inherits the defective gene may have fewer or more symptoms than the affected parent.
Complications can arise that may require special attention, including:
Developmental delays. If your child is affected developmentally, he or she may have difficulty with organization and spatial sense. Sometimes the developmental challenges are significant enough to require a special plan to address your child's learning and educational needs.
Bleeding and bruising. Sometimes the excessive bleeding common in Noonan syndrome isn't discovered until a person has dental work or surgery and experiences excessive bleeding.
Lymphatic complications. These usually involve excess fluid that gets stored in various places in the body. Sometimes fluid can collect in the space around the heart and lungs.
Urinary tract complications. Structural abnormalities in the kidneys may increase the risk of urinary tract infections.
Fertility issues. Males may have a low sperm count and other fertility problems because of undescended testicles or testicles that don't function properly.
Increased risk of cancer. There may be an increased risk of developing certain types of cancer, such as leukemia or certain types of tumors.
Signs and symptoms of norovirus infection include: Nausea, Vomiting, Stomach pain or cramps, Watery or loose diarrhea, Feeling ill, Low-grade fever, Muscle pain.
Signs and symptoms usually begin 12 to 48 hours after exposure to norovirus and last one to three days. You can continue to shed virus in your feces for up to two weeks after recovery. This shedding can last weeks to months if you have an underlying health condition.
Some people with norovirus infection show no signs or symptoms. However, they are still contagious and can spread the virus to others.
Seek medical attention if you develop diarrhea that doesn't go away within several days. Also, call your doctor if you have severe vomiting, bloody stools, stomach pain or dehydration.
Noroviruses are highly contagious and are shed in the feces of infected humans and animals. You can get norovirus by: Eating contaminated food, Drinking contaminated water, Touching your hand to your mouth after your hand has been in contact with a contaminated surface or object, Being in close contact with a person who has a norovirus infection.
Noroviruses are difficult to kill off because they can withstand hot and cold temperatures and most disinfectants.
Risk factors for becoming infected with norovirus include: Eating in a place where food is handled improperly, Attending preschool or a child care center, Living in close quarters, such as in nursing homes, Staying in hotels, resorts, cruise ships or other destinations with many people in close quarters, Having contact with someone who has norovirus infection.
For most people, norovirus infection usually clears up within a few days and isn't life-threatening. But in some people — especially children, older adults and people with compromised immune systems — norovirus infection can cause dehydration. Norovirus infection can cause severe dehydration, malnutrition and even death, especially in people who are older or immunocompromised, or in women who are pregnant.
Warning signs of dehydration include: Fatigue, Dry mouth and throat, Listlessness, Dizziness, Decreased urine output.
Children who are dehydrated might cry with few or no tears. They might be unusually sleepy or fussy.
Obesity is diagnosed when your body mass index (BMI) is 30 or higher. To determine your body mass index, divide your weight in pounds by your height in inches squared and multiply by 703. Or divide your weight in kilograms by your height in meters squared.
For most people, BMI provides a reasonable estimate of body fat. However, BMI doesn't directly measure body fat, so some people, such as muscular athletes, may have a BMI in the obesity category even though they don't have excess body fat.
If you're concerned about weight-related health problems, ask your doctor about obesity management. You and your doctor can evaluate your health risks and discuss your weight-loss options.
Although there are genetic, behavioral, metabolic and hormonal influences on body weight, obesity occurs when you take in more calories than you burn through exercise and normal daily activities. Your body stores these excess calories as fat.
Most Americans' diets are too high in calories — often from fast food and high-calorie beverages. People with obesity might eat more calories before feeling full, feel hungry sooner, or eat more due to stress or anxiety.
Obesity usually results from a combination of causes and contributing factors:
The genes you inherit from your parents may affect the amount of body fat you store, and where that fat is distributed. Genetics may also play a role in how efficiently your body converts food into energy, how your body regulates your appetite and how your body burns calories during exercise.
Obesity tends to run in families. That's not just because of the genes they share. Family members also tend to share similar eating and activity habits.
Unhealthy diet. A diet that's high in calories, lacking in fruits and vegetables, full of fast food, and laden with high-calorie beverages and oversized portions contributes to weight gain.
Liquid calories. People can drink many calories without feeling full, especially calories from alcohol. Other high-calorie beverages, such as sugared soft drinks, can contribute to significant weight gain.
Inactivity. If you have a sedentary lifestyle, you can easily take in more calories every day than you burn through exercise and routine daily activities. Looking at computer, tablet and phone screens is a sedentary activity. The number of hours you spend in front of a screen is highly associated with weight gain.
In some people, obesity can be traced to a medical cause, such as Prader-Willi syndrome, Cushing syndrome and other conditions. Medical problems, such as arthritis, also can lead to decreased activity, which may result in weight gain.
Some medications can lead to weight gain if you don't compensate through diet or activity. These medications include some antidepressants, anti-seizure medications, diabetes medications, antipsychotic medications, steroids and beta blockers.
Social and economic factors are linked to obesity. Avoiding obesity is difficult if you don't have safe areas to walk or exercise. Similarly, you may not have been taught healthy ways of cooking, or you may not have access to healthier foods. In addition, the people you spend time with may influence your weight — you're more likely to develop obesity if you have friends or relatives with obesity.
Obesity can occur at any age, even in young children. But as you age, hormonal changes and a less active lifestyle increase your risk of obesity. In addition, the amount of muscle in your body tends to decrease with age. Generally, lower muscle mass leads to a decrease in metabolism. These changes also reduce calorie needs, and can make it harder to keep off excess weight. If you don't consciously control what you eat and become more physically active as you age, you'll likely gain weight.
Pregnancy. Weight gain is common during pregnancy. Some women find this weight difficult to lose after the baby is born. This weight gain may contribute to the development of obesity in women. Breast-feeding may be the best option to lose the weight gained during pregnancy.
Quitting smoking. Quitting smoking is often associated with weight gain. And for some, it can lead to enough weight gain to qualify as obesity. Often, this happens as people use food to cope with smoking withdrawal. In the long run, however, quitting smoking is still a greater benefit to your health than is continuing to smoke. Your doctor can help you prevent weight gain after quitting smoking.
Lack of sleep. Not getting enough sleep or getting too much sleep can cause changes in hormones that increase your appetite. You may also crave foods high in calories and carbohydrates, which can contribute to weight gain.
Stress. Many external factors that affect your mood and well-being may contribute to obesity. People often seek more high-calorie food when experiencing stressful situations.
Microbiome. Your gut bacteria are affected by what you eat and may contribute to weight gain or difficulty losing weight.
Previous attempts to lose weight. Previous attempts of weight loss followed by rapid weight regain may contribute to further weight gain. This phenomenon, sometimes called yo-yo dieting, can slow your metabolism.
Even if you have one or more of these risk factors, it doesn't mean that you're destined to develop obesity. You can counteract most risk factors through diet, physical activity and exercise, and behavior changes.
People with obesity are more likely to develop a number of potentially serious health problems, including:
Heart disease and strokes. Obesity makes you more likely to have high blood pressure and abnormal cholesterol levels, which are risk factors for heart disease and strokes.
Type 2 diabetes. Obesity can affect the way your body uses insulin to control blood sugar levels. This raises your risk of insulin resistance and diabetes.
Certain cancers. Obesity may increase your risk of cancer of the uterus, cervix, endometrium, ovary, breast, colon, rectum, esophagus, liver, gallbladder, pancreas, kidney and prostate.
Digestive problems. Obesity increases the likelihood that you'll develop heartburn, gallbladder disease and liver problems.
Gynecological and sexual problems. Obesity may cause infertility and irregular periods in women. Obesity also can cause erectile dysfunction in men.
Sleep apnea. People with obesity are more likely to have sleep apnea, a potentially serious disorder in which breathing repeatedly stops and starts during sleep.
Osteoarthritis. Obesity increases the stress placed on weight-bearing joints, in addition to promoting inflammation within the body. These factors may lead to complications such as osteoarthritis.
Obesity can diminish your overall quality of life. You may not be able to do things you used to do, such as participating in enjoyable activities. You may avoid public places. People with obesity may even encounter discrimination.
Other weight-related issues that may affect your quality of life include: Depression, Disability, Sexual problems, Shame and guilt, Social isolation, Lower work achievement.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder usually includes both obsessions and compulsions. But it's also possible to have only obsession symptoms or only compulsion symptoms. You may or may not realize that your obsessions and compulsions are excessive or unreasonable, but they take up a great deal of time and interfere with your daily routine and social, school or work functioning.
OCD obsessions are repeated, persistent and unwanted thoughts, urges or images that are intrusive and cause distress or anxiety. You might try to ignore them or get rid of them by performing a compulsive behavior or ritual. These obsessions typically intrude when you're trying to think of or do other things.
Obsessions often have themes to them, such as: Fear of contamination or dirt, Doubting and having difficulty tolerating uncertainty, Needing things orderly and symmetrical, Aggressive or horrific thoughts about losing control and harming yourself or others, Unwanted thoughts, including aggression, or sexual or religious subjects.
Examples of obsession signs and symptoms include: Fear of being contaminated by touching objects others have touched, Doubts that you've locked the door or turned off the stove, Intense stress when objects aren't orderly or facing a certain way, Images of driving your car into a crowd of people, Thoughts about shouting obscenities or acting inappropriately in public, Unpleasant sexual images, Avoidance of situations that can trigger obsessions, such as shaking hands.
OCD compulsions are repetitive behaviors that you feel driven to perform. These repetitive behaviors or mental acts are meant to reduce anxiety related to your obsessions or prevent something bad from happening. However, engaging in the compulsions brings no pleasure and may offer only a temporary relief from anxiety.
You may make up rules or rituals to follow that help control your anxiety when you're having obsessive thoughts. These compulsions are excessive and often are not realistically related to the problem they're intended to fix.
As with obsessions, compulsions typically have themes, such as: Washing and cleaning, Checking, Counting, Orderliness, Following a strict routine, Demanding reassurance.
Examples of compulsion signs and symptoms include: Hand-washing until your skin becomes raw, Checking doors repeatedly to make sure they're locked, Checking the stove repeatedly to make sure it's off, Counting in certain patterns, Silently repeating a prayer, word or phrase, Arranging your canned goods to face the same way.
OCD usually begins in the teen or young adult years, but it can start in childhood. Symptoms usually begin gradually and tend to vary in severity throughout life. The types of obsessions and compulsions you experience can also change over time. Symptoms generally worsen when you experience greater stress. OCD, usually considered a lifelong disorder, can have mild to moderate symptoms or be so severe and time-consuming that it becomes disabling.
There's a difference between being a perfectionist — someone who requires flawless results or performance, for example — and having OCD. OCD thoughts aren't simply excessive worries about real problems in your life or liking to have things clean or arranged in a specific way.
If your obsessions and compulsions are affecting your quality of life, see your doctor or mental health professional.
The cause of obsessive-compulsive disorder isn't fully understood. Main theories include:
Biology. OCD may be a result of changes in your body's own natural chemistry or brain functions.
Genetics. OCD may have a genetic component, but specific genes have yet to be identified.
Learning. Obsessive fears and compulsive behaviors can be learned from watching family members or gradually learned over time.
Factors that may increase the risk of developing or triggering obsessive-compulsive disorder include:
Family history. Having parents or other family members with the disorder can increase your risk of developing OCD.
Stressful life events. If you've experienced traumatic or stressful events, your risk may increase. This reaction may, for some reason, trigger the intrusive thoughts, rituals and emotional distress characteristic of OCD.
Other mental health disorders. OCD may be related to other mental health disorders, such as anxiety disorders, depression, substance abuse or tic disorders.
Problems resulting from obsessive-compulsive disorder may include, among others: Excessive time spent engaging in ritualistic behaviors, Health issues, such as contact dermatitis from frequent hand-washing, Difficulty attending work, school or social activities, Troubled relationships, Overall poor quality of life, Suicidal thoughts and behavior.
Signs and symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea include: Excessive daytime sleepiness, Loud snoring, Observed episodes of stopped breathing during sleep, Abrupt awakenings accompanied by gasping or choking, Awakening with a dry mouth or sore throat, Morning headache, Difficulty concentrating during the day, Experiencing mood changes, such as depression or irritability, High blood pressure, Nighttime sweating, Decreased libido.
Consult a medical professional if you experience, or if your partner observes, the following: Snoring loud enough to disturb your sleep or that of others, Waking up gasping or choking, Intermittent pauses in your breathing during sleep, Excessive daytime drowsiness, which may cause you to fall asleep while you're working, watching television or even driving a vehicle.
Many people may not think of snoring as a sign of something potentially serious, and not everyone who snores has obstructive sleep apnea.
Be sure to talk to your doctor if you experience loud snoring, especially snoring that's punctuated by periods of silence. With obstructive sleep apnea, snoring usually is loudest when you sleep on your back, and it quiets when you turn on your side.
Ask your doctor about any sleep problem that leaves you chronically fatigued, sleepy and irritable. Excessive daytime drowsiness may be due to other disorders, such as narcolepsy.
Obstructive sleep apnea occurs when the muscles in the back of your throat relax too much to allow normal breathing. These muscles support structures including the back of the roof of your mouth (soft palate), the triangular piece of tissue hanging from the soft palate (uvula), the tonsils and the tongue.
When the muscles relax, your airway narrows or closes as you breathe in and breathing may be inadequate for 10 seconds or longer. This may lower the level of oxygen in your blood and cause a buildup of carbon dioxide.
Your brain senses this impaired breathing and briefly rouses you from sleep so that you can reopen your airway. This awakening is usually so brief that you don't remember it.
You can awaken with shortness of breath that corrects itself quickly, within one or two deep breaths. You may make a snorting, choking or gasping sound.
This pattern can repeat itself five to 30 times or more each hour, all night long. These disruptions impair your ability to reach the desired deep, restful phases of sleep, and you'll probably feel sleepy during your waking hours.
People with obstructive sleep apnea may not be aware that their sleep was interrupted. In fact, many people with this type of sleep apnea think they slept well all night.
Anyone can develop obstructive sleep apnea. However, certain factors put you at increased risk, including:
Excess weight. Most but not all people with obstructive sleep apnea are overweight. Fat deposits around the upper airway may obstruct breathing. Medical conditions that are associated with obesity, such as hypothyroidism and polycystic ovary syndrome, also can cause obstructive sleep apnea.
However, not everyone with obstructive sleep apnea is overweight and vice versa. Thin people can develop the disorder, too.
Narrowed airway. You may inherit naturally narrow airways. Or your tonsils or adenoids may become enlarged, which can block your airway.
High blood pressure (hypertension). Obstructive sleep apnea is relatively common in people with hypertension.
Chronic nasal congestion. Obstructive sleep apnea occurs twice as often in those who have consistent nasal congestion at night, regardless of the cause. This may be due to narrowed airways.
Smoking. People who smoke are more likely to have obstructive sleep apnea.
Diabetes. Obstructive sleep apnea may be more common in people with diabetes.
Sex. In general, men are twice as likely as premenopausal women to have obstructive sleep apnea. The frequency of obstructive sleep apnea increases in women after menopause.
A family history of sleep apnea. If you have family members with obstructive sleep apnea, you may be at increased risk.
Asthma. Research has found an association between asthma and the risk of obstructive sleep apnea.
Obstructive sleep apnea is considered a serious medical condition. Complications may include:
Daytime fatigue and sleepiness. The repeated awakenings associated with obstructive sleep apnea make normal, restorative sleep impossible.
People with obstructive sleep apnea often experience severe daytime drowsiness, fatigue and irritability. They may have difficulty concentrating and find themselves falling asleep at work, while watching TV or even when driving. They may also be at higher risk of work-related accidents.
Children and young people with obstructive sleep apnea may do poorly in school and commonly have attention or behavior problems.
Cardiovascular problems. Sudden drops in blood oxygen levels that occur during obstructive sleep apnea increase blood pressure and strain the cardiovascular system. Many people with obstructive sleep apnea develop high blood pressure (hypertension), which can increase the risk of heart disease.
The more severe the obstructive sleep apnea, the greater the risk of coronary artery disease, heart attack, heart failure and stroke.
Obstructive sleep apnea increases the risk of abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias). These abnormal rhythms can lower blood pressure. If there's underlying heart disease, these repeated multiple episodes of arrhythmias could lead to sudden death.
Complications with medications and surgery. Obstructive sleep apnea also is a concern with certain medications and general anesthesia. These medications, such as sedatives, narcotic analgesics and general anesthetics, relax your upper airway and may worsen your obstructive sleep apnea.
If you have obstructive sleep apnea, you may experience worse breathing problems after major surgery, especially after being sedated and lying on your back. People with obstructive sleep apnea may be more prone to complications after surgery.
Before you have surgery, tell your doctor if you have obstructive sleep apnea or symptoms related to obstructive sleep apnea. If you have obstructive sleep apnea symptoms, your doctor may test you for obstructive sleep apnea prior to surgery.
Eye problems. Some research has found a connection between obstructive sleep apnea and certain eye conditions, such as glaucoma. Eye complications can usually be treated.
Sleep-deprived partners. Loud snoring can keep those around you from getting good rest and eventually disrupt your relationships. Some partners may even choose to sleep in another room. Many bed partners of people who snore are sleep deprived as well.
People with obstructive sleep apnea may also complain of memory problems, morning headaches, mood swings or feelings of depression, and a need to urinate frequently at night (nocturia).
Occupational asthma symptoms are similar to those caused by other types of asthma. Signs and symptoms may include: Wheezing, sometimes just at night, Coughing, Shortness of breath, Chest tightness.
Other possible accompanying signs and symptoms may include: Runny nose, Nasal congestion, Eye irritation and tearing.
Occupational asthma symptoms depend on the substance you're exposed to, how long and how often you're exposed, and other factors. Your symptoms may:
Get worse as the workweek progresses, go away during weekends and vacations, and recur when you return to work.
Occur both at work and away from work.
Start as soon as you're exposed to an asthma-inducing substance at work or only after a period of regular exposure to the substance.
Continue after exposure is stopped. The longer you're exposed to the asthma-causing substance, the more likely you'll have long-lasting or permanent asthma symptoms.
Seek immediate medical treatment if your symptoms worsen. Severe asthma attacks can be life-threatening. Signs and symptoms of an asthma attack that needs emergency treatment include: Rapid worsening of shortness of breath or wheezing, No improvement even after using a quick relief inhaler, Shortness of breath even with minimal activity.
Make an appointment to see a doctor if you have breathing problems, such as coughing, wheezing or shortness of breath. Breathing problems may be a sign of asthma, especially if symptoms seem to be getting worse over time or appear to be aggravated by specific triggers or irritants.
More than 250 workplace substances have been identified as possible causes of occupational asthma. These substances include:
Animal substances, such as proteins found in dander, hair, scales, fur, saliva and body wastes.
Chemicals used to make paints, varnishes, adhesives, laminates and soldering resin. Other examples include chemicals used to make insulation, packaging materials, and foam mattresses and upholstery.
Enzymes used in detergents and flour conditioners.
Metals, particularly platinum, chromium and nickel sulfate.
Plant substances, including proteins found in natural rubber latex, flour, cereals, cotton, flax, hemp, rye, wheat and papain — a digestive enzyme derived from papaya.
Respiratory irritants, such as chlorine gas, sulfur dioxide and smoke.
Asthma symptoms start when your lungs become irritated (inflamed). Inflammation causes several reactions that restrict the airways, making breathing difficult. With occupational asthma, lung inflammation may be triggered by an allergic response to a substance, which usually develops over time. Alternatively, inhaling fumes from a lung irritant, such as chlorine, can trigger immediate asthma symptoms in the absence of allergy.
The intensity of your exposure increases your risk of developing occupational asthma. In addition, you will have increased risk if:
You have existing allergies or asthma. Although this can increase your risk, many people who have allergies or asthma do jobs that expose them to lung irritants and never have symptoms.
Allergies or asthma runs in your family. Your parents may pass down a genetic predisposition to asthma.
You work around known asthma triggers. Some substances are known to be lung irritants and asthma triggers.
You smoke. Smoking increases your risk of developing asthma if you are exposed to certain types of irritants.
It's possible to develop occupational asthma in almost any workplace. But your risk is higher if you work in certain occupations. Some of the riskiest jobs and the asthma-producing substances associated with them include the following:
The longer you're exposed to a substance that causes occupational asthma, the worse your symptoms may become — and the longer it will take for them to improve once you end your exposure to the irritant. In some cases, exposure to airborne asthma triggers can cause permanent lung changes, resulting in disability or death.
Signs and symptoms of ocular rosacea can precede the skin symptoms of rosacea, develop at the same time, develop later or occur on their own. Signs and symptoms of ocular rosacea may include: Red, burning, itchy or watering eyes, Dry eyes, Grittiness or the feeling of having a foreign body in the eye or eyes, Blurred vision, Sensitivity to light (photophobia), Dilated small blood vessels on the white part of the eye that are visible when you look in a mirror, Red, swollen eyelids, Recurrent eye or eyelid infections, such as pink eye (conjunctivitis), blepharitis, sties or chalazia.
The severity of ocular rosacea symptoms doesn't always match the severity of skin symptoms.
Make an appointment to see a doctor if you have signs and symptoms of ocular rosacea, such as dry eyes, burning or itchy eyes, redness, or blurred vision.
If you've been diagnosed with skin rosacea, ask your doctor whether you should undergo periodic eye exams to check for ocular rosacea.
The exact cause of ocular rosacea, like skin rosacea, is unknown. It may be due to one or more factors, including: Heredity, Environmental factors, Bacterial involvement, Blocked glands in the eyelids, Eyelash mites.
Some research has also shown a possible link between skin rosacea and Helicobacter pylori bacteria, which is the same bacteria that causes gastrointestinal infections.
A number of factors that aggravate skin rosacea can aggravate ocular rosacea, as well. Some of these factors include: Hot or spicy foods or beverages, Alcohol, Sunlight, wind or temperature extremes, Certain emotions, such as stress, anger or embarrassment, Strenuous exercise, Hot baths or saunas.
Ocular rosacea is common in people with skin rosacea, although you can also have ocular rosacea without the skin being involved. Skin rosacea affects more women than men, and ocular rosacea affects men and women equally. It's also more common in fair-skinned people of Celtic and Northern European origin.
Ocular rosacea may affect the surface of your eye (cornea), particularly when you have dry eyes from evaporation of tears. Corneal complications can lead to visual symptoms. Inflammation of your eyelids (blepharitis) can cause secondary irritation of the cornea from misdirected eyelashes or other complications. Ultimately, corneal complications can lead to vision loss.
Sometimes it's difficult to recognize the difference between a strong-willed or emotional child and one with oppositional defiant disorder. It's normal to exhibit oppositional behavior at certain stages of a child's development.
Signs of ODD generally begin during preschool years. Sometimes ODD may develop later, but almost always before the early teen years. These behaviors cause significant impairment with family, social activities, school and work.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association, lists criteria for diagnosing ODD. The DSM-5 criteria include emotional and behavioral symptoms that last at least six months.
Angry and irritable mood: Often and easily loses temper, Is frequently touchy and easily annoyed by others, Is often angry and resentful.
Argumentative and defiant behavior: Often argues with adults or people in authority, Often actively defies or refuses to comply with adults' requests or rules, Often deliberately annoys or upsets people, Often blames others for his or her mistakes or misbehavior.
Vindictiveness: Is often spiteful or vindictive, Has shown spiteful or vindictive behavior at least twice in the past six months.
ODD can vary in severity:
Mild. Symptoms occur only in one setting, such as only at home, school, work or with peers.
Moderate. Some symptoms occur in at least two settings.
Severe. Some symptoms occur in three or more settings.
For some children, symptoms may first be seen only at home, but with time extend to other settings, such as school and with friends.
Your child isn't likely to see his or her behavior as a problem. Instead, he or she will probably complain about unreasonable demands or blame others for problems. If your child shows signs that may indicate ODD or other disruptive behavior, or you're concerned about your ability to parent a challenging child, seek help from a child psychologist or a child psychiatrist with expertise in disruptive behavior problems.
Ask your primary care doctor or your child's pediatrician to refer you to the appropriate professional.
There's no known clear cause of oppositional defiant disorder. Contributing causes may be a combination of inherited and environmental factors, including: Genetics — a child's natural disposition or temperament and possibly neurobiological differences in the way nerves and the brain function, Environment — problems with parenting that may involve a lack of supervision, inconsistent or harsh discipline, or abuse or neglect.
Oppositional defiant disorder is a complex problem. Possible risk factors for ODD include: Temperament — a child who has a temperament that includes difficulty regulating emotions, such as being highly emotionally reactive to situations or having trouble tolerating frustration, Parenting issues — a child who experiences abuse or neglect, harsh or inconsistent discipline, or a lack of parental supervision, Other family issues — a child who lives with parent or family discord or has a parent with a mental health or substance use disorder, Environment — oppositional and defiant behaviors can be strengthened and reinforced through attention from peers and inconsistent discipline from other authority figures, such as teachers.
Children and teenagers with oppositional defiant disorder may have trouble at home with parents and siblings, in school with teachers, and at work with supervisors and other authority figures. Children with ODD may struggle to make and keep friends and relationships.
ODD may lead to problems such as: Poor school and work performance, Antisocial behavior, Impulse control problems, Substance use disorder, Suicide.
Many children and teens with ODD also have other mental health disorders, such as: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), Conduct disorder, Depression, Anxiety, Learning and communication disorders.
Treating these other mental health disorders may help improve ODD symptoms. And it may be difficult to treat ODD if these other disorders are not evaluated and treated appropriately.
Optic neuritis usually affects one eye. Symptoms might include:
Pain. Most people who develop optic neuritis have eye pain that's worsened by eye movement. Sometimes the pain feels like a dull ache behind the eye.
Vision loss in one eye. Most people have at least some temporary reduction in vision, but the extent of loss varies. Noticeable vision loss usually develops over hours or days and improves over several weeks to months. Vision loss is permanent in some people.
Visual field loss. Side vision loss can occur in any pattern, such as central vision loss or peripheral vision loss.
Loss of color vision. Optic neuritis often affects color perception. You might notice that colors appear less vivid than normal.
Flashing lights. Some people with optic neuritis report seeing flashing or flickering lights with eye movements.
Eye conditions can be serious. Some can lead to permanent vision loss, and some are associated with other serious medical problems. Contact your doctor if:
You develop new symptoms, such as eye pain or a change in your vision.
Your symptoms worsen or don't improve with treatment.
You have unusual symptoms, including vision loss in both eyes, double vision, and numbness or weakness in one or more limbs, which can indicate a neurological disorder.
The exact cause of optic neuritis is unknown. It's believed to develop when the immune system mistakenly targets the substance covering your optic nerve, resulting in inflammation and damage to the myelin.
Normally, the myelin helps electrical impulses travel quickly from the eye to the brain, where they're converted into visual information. Optic neuritis disrupts this process, affecting vision.
The following autoimmune conditions often are associated with optic neuritis:
Multiple sclerosis. Multiple sclerosis is a disease in which your autoimmune system attacks the myelin sheath covering nerve fibers in your brain. In people with optic neuritis, the risk of developing multiple sclerosis after one episode of optic neuritis is about 50% over a lifetime.
Your risk of developing multiple sclerosis after optic neuritis increases further if an MRI scan shows lesions on your brain.
Neuromyelitis optica. In this condition, inflammation affects the optic nerve and spinal cord. Neuromyelitis optica has similarities to multiple sclerosis, but neuromyelitis optica doesn't cause damage to the nerves in the brain as often as multiple sclerosis does. Still, neuromyelitis optica is more severe than MS, often resulting in a diminished recovery after an attack compared with MS.
Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibody disorder. This condition can cause inflammation to the optic nerve, spinal cord or brain. Similar to MS and neuromyelitis optica, recurrent attacks of inflammation can occur. Recovery from MOG attacks is usually better than recovery from neuromyelitis optica.
When symptoms of optic neuritis are more complex, other associated causes need to be considered, including:
Infections. Bacterial infections, including Lyme disease, cat-scratch fever and syphilis, or viruses, such as measles, mumps and herpes, can cause optic neuritis.
Other diseases. Diseases such as sarcoidosis, Behcet's disease and lupus can cause recurrent optic neuritis.
Drugs and toxins. Some drugs and toxins have been associated with the development of optic neuritis. Ethambutol, used to treat tuberculosis, and methanol, a common ingredient in antifreeze, paints and solvents, are associated with optic neuritis.
Risk factors for developing optic neuritis include:
Age. Optic neuritis most often affects adults ages 20 to 40.
Sex. Women are much more likely to develop optic neuritis than men are.
Race. Optic neuritis occurs more often in white people.
Genetic mutations. Certain genetic mutations might increase your risk of developing optic neuritis or multiple sclerosis.
Complications arising from optic neuritis may include:
Optic nerve damage. Most people have some permanent optic nerve damage after an episode of optic neuritis, but the damage might not cause permanent symptoms.
Decreased visual acuity. Most people regain normal or near-normal vision within several months, but a partial loss of color discrimination might persist. For some people, vision loss persists.
Side effects of treatment. Steroid medications used to treat optic neuritis subdue your immune system, which causes your body to become more susceptible to infections. Other side effects include mood changes and weight gain.
Signs and symptoms of oral lichen planus affect the mucous membranes of the mouth.
The lesions may appear as: Lacy, white, raised patches of tissues, Red, swollen, tender patches of tissues, Open sores.
These lesions may appear on the: Inside of the cheeks, the most common location, Gums, Tongue, Inner tissues of the lips, Palate.
The white, lacy patches may not cause discomfort when they appear on the inside of the cheeks. However, symptoms accompanying red, swollen patches and open sores may include: Burning sensation or pain, Sensitivity to hot, acidic or spicy foods, Bleeding and irritation with tooth brushing, Inflammation of the gums (gingivitis), Painful, thickened patches on the tongue, Discomfort when speaking, chewing or swallowing.
If you have oral lichen planus, you may have lichen planus lesions affecting other parts of your body.
Skin. Lesions usually appear as purplish, flat-topped bumps that are often itchy.
Genitals. Lesions on the female genitalia often cause pain or burning and discomfort with intercourse. The lesions are usually red and eroded and occasionally appear as white areas. Lesions can also occur on male genitalia.
Ears. Lichen planus of the ears can lead to hearing loss.
Scalp. When skin lesions appear on the scalp, they may cause temporary or permanent hair loss.
Nails. Though rare, lichen planus of the toenails or fingernails may result in ridges on the nails, thinning or splitting of nails, and temporary or permanent nail loss.
Eyes. Rarely, lichen planus may involve the mucous membrane surfaces of the eyes, and can cause scarring and blindness.
Esophagus. Lichen planus of the esophagus is rare, but when it occurs, it may result in a narrowing of the esophagus or the formation of tightened, ringlike bands in the esophagus that can make swallowing difficult.
See your doctor or dentist if you have any signs or symptoms listed above.
It's not known what causes oral lichen planus. However, T lymphocytes — certain white blood cells involved in inflammation — appear to be activated in oral lichen planus. This could indicate an immune disorder, and genetic factors may be involved. But more research is needed to determine the exact cause.
It's possible that, in some people, oral lichen planus may be triggered by certain medications, mouth injury, infection or allergy-causing agents such as dental materials. Stress may be involved in symptoms becoming worse or recurring. However, these causes are not confirmed.
Anyone can develop oral lichen planus, but it's more common in middle-aged women.
Some factors may increase your risk of developing oral lichen planus, such as having a disorder that lowers your immunity or taking certain medications, though more research is needed.
Severe cases of oral lichen planus may increase the risk of: Significant pain, Weight loss or nutritional deficiency, Stress or anxiety, Depression, Scarring from erosive lesions, Secondary oral yeast or fungal infections, Oral cancer.
Initially, you may not even notice symptoms of oral thrush. Signs and symptoms may include: Creamy white lesions on your tongue, inner cheeks, and sometimes on the roof of your mouth, gums and tonsils, Slightly raised lesions with a cottage cheese-like appearance, Redness, burning or soreness that may be severe enough to cause difficulty eating or swallowing, Slight bleeding if the lesions are rubbed or scraped, Cracking and redness at the corners of your mouth, A cottony feeling in your mouth, Loss of taste, Redness, irritation and pain under dentures (denture stomatitis).
In severe cases, usually related to cancer or a weakened immune system from HIV/AIDS, the lesions may spread downward into your esophagus — the long, muscular tube stretching from the back of your mouth to your stomach (Candida esophagitis). If this occurs, you may experience difficulty swallowing and pain or feel as if food is getting stuck in your throat.
In addition to the distinctive white mouth lesions, infants may have trouble feeding or be fussy and irritable. They can pass the infection to their mothers during breast-feeding. The infection may then pass back and forth between the mother's breasts and the baby's mouth.
Women whose breasts are infected with candida may experience these signs and symptoms: Unusually red, sensitive, cracked or itchy nipples, Shiny or flaky skin on the darker, circular area around the nipple (areola), Unusual pain during nursing or painful nipples between feedings, Stabbing pains deep within the breast.
If you or your child develops white lesions inside the mouth, see your doctor or dentist.
Thrush is uncommon in healthy older children, teenagers and adults, so if thrush develops, see your doctor to determine if further evaluation is needed to check for an underlying medical condition or other cause.
Normally, your immune system works to repel harmful invading organisms, such as viruses, bacteria and fungi, while maintaining a balance between "good" and "bad" microbes that normally inhabit your body. But sometimes these protective mechanisms fail, increasing the number of candida fungus and allowing an oral thrush infection to take hold.
The most common type of candida fungus is Candida albicans. Several factors, such as a weakened immune system, can increase your risk of oral thrush.
You may have an increased risk of oral thrush infection if any of these issues apply:
Weakened immunity. Oral thrush is more likely to occur in infants and older adults due to reduced immunity. Some medical conditions and treatments can suppress your immune system, such as cancer and its treatments, organ transplantation and required drugs that suppress the immune system, and HIV/AIDS.
Diabetes. If you have untreated diabetes or the disease isn't well-controlled, your saliva may contain large amounts of sugar, which encourages the growth of candida.
Vaginal yeast infections. Vaginal yeast infections are caused by the same fungus that causes oral thrush. You can pass the infection to your baby.
Medications. Drugs such as prednisone, inhaled corticosteroids, or antibiotics that disturb the natural balance of microorganisms in your body can increase your risk of oral thrush.
Other oral conditions. Wearing dentures, especially upper dentures, or having conditions that cause dry mouth can increase the risk of oral thrush.
Oral thrush is seldom a problem for healthy children and adults.
For people with lowered immunity, such as from cancer treatment or HIV/AIDS, thrush can be more serious. Untreated oral thrush can lead to more-serious systemic candida infections. If you have a weakened immune system, thrush may spread to your esophagus or other parts of your body.
Orchitis signs and symptoms usually develop suddenly and can include: Swelling in one or both testicles, Pain ranging from mild to severe, Fever, Nausea and vomiting, General feeling of unwellness (malaise).
The terms "testicle pain" and "groin pain" are sometimes used interchangeably. But groin pain occurs in the fold of skin between the thigh and abdomen — not in the testicle. The causes of groin pain are different from the causes of testicle pain.
If you have pain or swelling in your scrotum, especially if the pain occurs suddenly, see your doctor right away.
A number of conditions can cause testicle pain, and some require immediate treatment. One such condition involves twisting of the spermatic cord (testicular torsion), which might cause pain similar to that caused by orchitis. Your doctor can perform tests to determine which condition is causing your pain.
Orchitis can be caused by a bacterial or viral infection. Sometimes a cause of orchitis can't be determined.
Most often, bacterial orchitis is associated with or the result of epididymitis. Epididymitis usually is caused by an infection of the urethra or bladder that spreads to the epididymis.
Often, the cause of the infection is an STI. Other causes of infection can be related to having been born with abnormalities in your urinary tract or having had a catheter or medical instruments inserted into your penis.
The mumps virus usually causes viral orchitis. Nearly one-third of males who contract the mumps after puberty develop orchitis, usually four to seven days after onset of the mumps.
Risk factors for nonsexually transmitted orchitis include: Not being immunized against mumps, Having recurring urinary tract infections, Having surgery that involves the genitals or urinary tract, Being born with an abnormality in the urinary tract.
Sexual behaviors that can lead to STIs put you at risk of sexually transmitted orchitis. Those behaviors include having: Multiple sexual partners, Sex with a partner who has an STI, Sex without a condom, A personal history of an STI.
Complications of orchitis may include:
Testicular atrophy. Orchitis can eventually cause the affected testicle to shrink.
Scrotal abscess. The infected tissue fills with pus.
Infertility. Occasionally, orchitis can cause infertility or inadequate testosterone production (hypogonadism). But these are less likely if orchitis affects only one testicle.
The most common symptom is lightheadedness or dizziness when you stand up after sitting or lying down. Symptoms usually last less than a few minutes.
Orthostatic hypotension signs and symptoms include: Lightheadedness or dizziness upon standing, Blurry vision, Weakness, Fainting (syncope), Confusion, Nausea.
Occasional dizziness or lightheadedness may be fairly minor — triggered by mild dehydration, low blood sugar or overheating. Dizziness or lightheadedness may also happen when you stand after sitting for a long time. If these symptoms happen only occasionally, there's likely no cause for concern.
It's important to see your doctor if you have frequent symptoms of orthostatic hypotension because they can signal serious problems. It's even more urgent to see a doctor if you lose consciousness, even for just a few seconds.
Keep a record of your symptoms, when they occurred, how long they lasted and what you were doing at the time. If these occur at dangerous times, such as while driving, discuss this with your doctor.
When you stand up, gravity causes blood to pool in your legs and abdomen. This decreases blood pressure because there's less blood circulating back to your heart.
Normally, special cells (baroreceptors) near your heart and neck arteries sense this lower blood pressure. The baroreceptors send signals to centers in your brain, which signals your heart to beat faster and pump more blood, which stabilizes blood pressure. These cells also narrow the blood vessels and increase blood pressure.
Orthostatic hypotension occurs when something interrupts the body's natural process of counteracting low blood pressure. Many conditions can cause orthostatic hypotension, including:
Dehydration. Fever, vomiting, not drinking enough fluids, severe diarrhea and strenuous exercise with a lot of sweating can all lead to dehydration, which decreases blood volume. Mild dehydration can cause symptoms of orthostatic hypotension, such as weakness, dizziness and fatigue.
Heart problems. Some heart conditions that can lead to low blood pressure include extremely low heart rate (bradycardia), heart valve problems, heart attack and heart failure. These conditions prevent your body from responding rapidly enough to pump more blood when standing up.
Endocrine problems. Thyroid conditions, adrenal insufficiency (Addison's disease) and low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) can cause orthostatic hypotension. So can diabetes — which can damage the nerves that help send signals regulating blood pressure.
Nervous system disorders. Some nervous system disorders, such as Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy, Lewy body dementia, pure autonomic failure and amyloidosis, can disrupt your body's normal blood pressure regulation system.
Eating meals. Some people have low blood pressure after eating meals (postprandial hypotension). This condition is more common in older adults.
The risk factors for orthostatic hypotension include:
Age. Orthostatic hypotension is common in those who are age 65 and older. Special cells (baroreceptors) near your heart and neck arteries that regulate blood pressure can slow as you age. It also may be harder for an aging heart to speed up and compensate for drops in blood pressure.
Medications. These include medications used to treat high blood pressure or heart disease, such as diuretics, alpha blockers, beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and nitrates.
Other medications that may increase your risk of orthostatic hypotension include medications used to treat Parkinson's disease, certain antidepressants, certain antipsychotics, muscle relaxants, medications to treat erectile dysfunction and narcotics.
Using medications that treat high blood pressure with other prescription and over-the-counter medications may cause low blood pressure.
Certain diseases. Some heart conditions, such as heart valve problems, heart attack and heart failure; certain nervous system disorders, such as Parkinson's disease; and diseases that cause nerve damage (neuropathy), such as diabetes, increase the risk of low blood pressure.
Heat exposure. Being in a hot environment can cause heavy sweating and possibly dehydration, which can lower your blood pressure and trigger orthostatic hypotension.
Bed rest. If you have to stay in bed a long time because of an illness, you may become weak. When you try to stand up, you may have orthostatic hypotension.
Pregnancy. Because your circulatory system expands rapidly during pregnancy, blood pressure is likely to drop. This is normal, and blood pressure usually returns to your pre-pregnancy level after you've given birth.
Alcohol. Drinking alcohol can increase your risk of orthostatic hypotension.
Persistent orthostatic hypotension can cause serious complications, especially in older adults. These include:
Falls. Falling down as a result of fainting is a common complication in people with orthostatic hypotension.
Stroke. The swings in blood pressure when you stand and sit as a result of orthostatic hypotension can be a risk factor for stroke due to the reduced blood supply to the brain.
Cardiovascular diseases. Orthostatic hypotension can be a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases and complications, such as chest pain, heart failure or heart rhythm problems.
Knee pain and swelling just below the kneecap are the main indicators of Osgood-Schlatter disease. Pain usually worsens during certain activities, such as running, kneeling and jumping, and eases with rest.
The condition usually occurs in just one knee, but it can affect both knees. The discomfort can last from weeks to months and can recur until your child stops growing.
Call your child's doctor if knee pain interferes with your child's ability to perform daily activities. Seek medical attention if the knee is swollen and red, or if the knee pain is associated with fever, locking or instability of the knee joint.
During activities that involve running, jumping and bending — such as soccer, basketball, volleyball and ballet — your child's thigh muscles (quadriceps) pull on the tendon that connects the kneecap to the growth plate at the top part of the shinbone.
This repeated stress can cause the tendon to pull on the growth plate where the tendon inserts into the shinbone, resulting in the pain and swelling associated with Osgood-Schlatter disease. Some children's bodies try to close that gap with new bone growth, which can result in a bony lump at that spot.
The main risk factors for Osgood-Schlatter disease are:
Age. Osgood-Schlatter disease occurs during puberty's growth spurts. Age ranges differ by sex because girls enter puberty earlier than do boys. Osgood-Schlatter disease typically occurs in boys ages 12 to 14 and girls ages 10 to 13.
Sex. Osgood-Schlatter disease is more common in boys, but the gender gap is narrowing as more girls become involved with sports.
Sports. The condition happens most often with sports that involve running, jumping and swift changes in direction.
Flexibility. Tightness in the quadriceps muscles can increase the pull of the kneecap's tendon on the growth plate at the top of the shinbone.
Complications of Osgood-Schlatter disease are uncommon. If they occur, they might include chronic pain or localized swelling.
Even after symptoms have resolved, a bony bump might remain on the shinbone just below the kneecap. This bump can persist to some degree throughout your child's life, but it doesn't usually interfere with knee function.
In rare cases, Osgood-Shlattter disease can cause the growth plate to be pulled away from the shinbone.
Osteoarthritis symptoms often develop slowly and worsen over time. Signs and symptoms of osteoarthritis include:
Pain. Affected joints might hurt during or after movement.
Stiffness. Joint stiffness might be most noticeable upon awakening or after being inactive.
Tenderness. Your joint might feel tender when you apply light pressure to or near it.
Loss of flexibility. You might not be able to move your joint through its full range of motion.
Grating sensation. You might feel a grating sensation when you use the joint, and you might hear popping or crackling.
Bone spurs. These extra bits of bone, which feel like hard lumps, can form around the affected joint.
Swelling. This might be caused by soft tissue inflammation around the joint.
If you have joint pain or stiffness that doesn't go away, make an appointment with your doctor.
Osteoarthritis occurs when the cartilage that cushions the ends of bones in your joints gradually deteriorates. Cartilage is a firm, slippery tissue that enables nearly frictionless joint motion. Eventually, if the cartilage wears down completely, bone will rub on bone.
Osteoarthritis has often been referred to as a "wear and tear" disease. But besides the breakdown of cartilage, osteoarthritis affects the entire joint. It causes changes in the bone and deterioration of the connective tissues that hold the joint together and attach muscle to bone. It also causes inflammation of the joint lining.
Factors that can increase your risk of osteoarthritis include:
Older age. The risk of osteoarthritis increases with age.
Sex. Women are more likely to develop osteoarthritis, though it isn't clear why.
Obesity. Carrying extra body weight contributes to osteoarthritis in several ways, and the more you weigh, the greater your risk. Increased weight adds stress to weight-bearing joints, such as your hips and knees. Also, fat tissue produces proteins that can cause harmful inflammation in and around your joints.
Joint injuries. Injuries, such as those that occur when playing sports or from an accident, can increase the risk of osteoarthritis. Even injuries that occurred many years ago and seemingly healed can increase your risk of osteoarthritis.
Repeated stress on the joint. If your job or a sport you play places repetitive stress on a joint, that joint might eventually develop osteoarthritis.
Genetics. Some people inherit a tendency to develop osteoarthritis.
Bone deformities. Some people are born with malformed joints or defective cartilage.
Certain metabolic diseases. These include diabetes and a condition in which your body has too much iron (hemochromatosis).
Depending on the joint that's affected, signs and symptoms of osteochondritis dissecans might include:
Pain. This most common symptom of osteochondritis dissecans might be triggered by physical activity — walking up stairs, climbing a hill or playing sports.
Swelling and tenderness. The skin around your joint might be swollen and tender.
Joint popping or locking. Your joint might pop or stick in one position if a loose fragment gets caught between bones during movement.
Joint weakness. You might feel as though your joint is "giving way" or weakening.
Decreased range of motion. You might be unable to straighten the affected limb completely.
If you have persistent pain or soreness in your knee, elbow or another joint, see your doctor. Other signs and symptoms that should prompt a call or visit to your doctor include joint swelling or an inability to move a joint through its full range of motion.
The cause of osteochondritis dissecans is unknown. The reduced blood flow to the end of the affected bone might result from repetitive trauma — small, multiple episodes of minor, unrecognized injury that damage the bone. There might be a genetic component, making some people more inclined to develop the disorder.
Osteochondritis dissecans occurs most commonly in children and adolescents between the ages of 10 and 20 who are highly active in sports.
Osteochondritis dissecans can increase your risk of eventually developing osteoarthritis in that joint.
When osteomalacia is in its early stages, you might not have symptoms, although signs of osteomalacia might show on an X-ray or other diagnostic tests. As osteomalacia progresses, you might develop bone pain and muscle weakness.
The dull, aching pain associated with osteomalacia most commonly affects the lower back, pelvis, hips, legs and ribs. The pain might be worse at night or when you put pressure on the bones. The pain is rarely relieved completely by rest.
Decreased muscle tone and leg weakness can cause a waddling gait and make walking slower and more difficult.
Osteomalacia results from a defect in the bone-maturing process. Your body uses the minerals calcium and phosphate to help build strong bones. You might develop osteomalacia if you don't get enough of these minerals in your diet or if your body doesn't absorb them properly. These problems can be caused by:
Vitamin D deficiency. Sunlight produces vitamin D in your skin. Dietary vitamin D is usually from foods to which the vitamin has been added, such as cow's milk.
People who live in areas where sunlight is limited, get little exposure to sunlight or eat a diet low in vitamin D can develop osteomalacia. Vitamin D deficiency is the most common cause of osteomalacia worldwide.
Certain surgeries. Normally, the stomach breaks down food to release calcium and other minerals that are absorbed in the intestine. This process is disrupted if you have surgery to remove part or all of your stomach or to bypass your small intestine and can result in vitamin D and calcium deficiency.
Celiac disease. In this autoimmune disorder, foods containing gluten, a protein found in wheat, barley and rye, can damage the lining of your small intestine. A damaged intestinal lining doesn't absorb nutrients well, and can lead to vitamin D and calcium deficiency.
Kidney or liver disorders. These organs are involved in activating vitamin D in your body. Problems with your kidneys or liver can affect your body's ability to make active vitamin D.
Drugs. Some drugs used to treat seizures, including phenytoin (Dilantin, Phenytek) and phenobarbital, can cause severe vitamin D deficiency and osteomalacia.
The risk of developing osteomalacia is highest in people who don't get enough dietary vitamin D and have little sun exposure, such as older adults and those who are housebound or hospitalized.
If you have osteomalacia, you're more likely to break bones, particularly those in your ribs, spine and legs.
Signs and symptoms of osteomyelitis include: Fever, Swelling, warmth and redness over the area of the infection, Pain in the area of the infection, Fatigue.
Sometimes osteomyelitis causes no signs and symptoms or the signs and symptoms are hard to distinguish from other problems. This may be especially true for infants, older adults and people whose immune systems are compromised.
See your doctor if you experience worsening bone pain along with fever. If you're at risk of infection because of a medical condition or recent surgery or injury, see your doctor right away if you notice signs and symptoms of an infection.
Most cases of osteomyelitis are caused by staphylococcus bacteria, types of germs commonly found on the skin or in the nose of even healthy individuals.
Germs can enter a bone in a variety of ways, including:
The bloodstream. Germs in other parts of your body — for example, in the lungs from pneumonia or in the bladder from a urinary tract infection — can travel through your bloodstream to a weakened spot in a bone.
Injuries. Severe puncture wounds can carry germs deep inside your body. If such an injury becomes infected, the germs can spread into a nearby bone. Germs can also enter the body if you have broken a bone so severely that part of it is sticking out through your skin.
Surgery. Direct contamination with germs can occur during surgeries to replace joints or repair fractures.
Your bones are normally resistant to infection, but this protection lessens as you get older. Other factors that can make your bones more vulnerable to osteomyelitis may include:
A severe bone fracture or a deep puncture wound gives bacteria a route to enter your bone or nearby tissue. A deep puncture wound, such as an animal bite or a nail piercing through a shoe, can also provide a pathway for infection.
Surgery to repair broken bones or replace worn joints also can accidentally open a path for germs to enter a bone. Implanted orthopedic hardware is a risk factor for infection.
When blood vessels are damaged or blocked, your body has trouble distributing the infection-fighting cells needed to keep a small infection from growing larger. What begins as a small cut can progress to a deep ulcer that may expose deep tissue and bone to infection.
Diseases that impair blood circulation include: Poorly controlled diabetes, Peripheral artery disease, often related to smoking, Sickle cell disease.
There are a number of conditions that require the use of medical tubing to connect the outside world with your internal organs. However, this tubing can also serve as a way for germs to get into your body, increasing your risk of an infection in general, which can lead to osteomyelitis.
Examples of when this type of tubing might be used include: Dialysis machine tubing, Urinary catheters, Long-term intravenous tubing, sometimes called central lines.
If your immune system is affected by a medical condition or medication, you have a greater risk of osteomyelitis. Factors that may suppress your immune system include: Cancer treatment, Poorly controlled diabetes, Needing to take corticosteroids or drugs called tumor necrosis factor inhibitors.
People who inject illegal drugs are more likely to develop osteomyelitis because they may use nonsterile needles and are less likely to sterilize their skin before injections.
Osteomyelitis complications may include:
Bone death (osteonecrosis). An infection in your bone can impede blood circulation within the bone, leading to bone death. Areas where bone has died need to be surgically removed for antibiotics to be effective.
Septic arthritis. Sometimes, infection within bones can spread into a nearby joint.
Impaired growth. Normal growth in bones or joints in children may be affected if osteomyelitis occurs in the softer areas, called growth plates, at either end of the long bones of the arms and legs.
Skin cancer. If your osteomyelitis has resulted in an open sore that is draining pus, the surrounding skin is at higher risk of developing squamous cell cancer.
There typically are no symptoms in the early stages of bone loss. But once your bones have been weakened by osteoporosis, you might have signs and symptoms that include: Back pain, caused by a fractured or collapsed vertebra, Loss of height over time, A stooped posture, A bone that breaks much more easily than expected.
You might want to talk to your doctor about osteoporosis if you went through early menopause or took corticosteroids for several months at a time, or if either of your parents had hip fractures.
Your bones are in a constant state of renewal — new bone is made and old bone is broken down. When you're young, your body makes new bone faster than it breaks down old bone and your bone mass increases. After the early 20s this process slows, and most people reach their peak bone mass by age 30. As people age, bone mass is lost faster than it's created.
How likely you are to develop osteoporosis depends partly on how much bone mass you attained in your youth. Peak bone mass is somewhat inherited and varies also by ethnic group. The higher your peak bone mass, the more bone you have "in the bank" and the less likely you are to develop osteoporosis as you age.
A number of factors can increase the likelihood that you'll develop osteoporosis — including your age, race, lifestyle choices, and medical conditions and treatments.
Some risk factors for osteoporosis are out of your control, including:
Your sex. Women are much more likely to develop osteoporosis than are men.
Age. The older you get, the greater your risk of osteoporosis.
Race. You're at greatest risk of osteoporosis if you're white or of Asian descent.
Family history. Having a parent or sibling with osteoporosis puts you at greater risk, especially if your mother or father fractured a hip.
Body frame size. Men and women who have small body frames tend to have a higher risk because they might have less bone mass to draw from as they age.
Osteoporosis is more common in people who have too much or too little of certain hormones in their bodies. Examples include:
Sex hormones. Lowered sex hormone levels tend to weaken bone. The reduction of estrogen levels in women at menopause is one of the strongest risk factors for developing osteoporosis.
Men have a gradual reduction in testosterone levels as they age. Treatments for prostate cancer that reduce testosterone levels in men and treatments for breast cancer that reduce estrogen levels in women are likely to accelerate bone loss.
Thyroid problems. Too much thyroid hormone can cause bone loss. This can occur if your thyroid is overactive or if you take too much thyroid hormone medication to treat an underactive thyroid.
Other glands. Osteoporosis has also been associated with overactive parathyroid and adrenal glands.
Osteoporosis is more likely to occur in people who have:
Low calcium intake. A lifelong lack of calcium plays a role in the development of osteoporosis. Low calcium intake contributes to diminished bone density, early bone loss and an increased risk of fractures.
Eating disorders. Severely restricting food intake and being underweight weakens bone in both men and women.
Gastrointestinal surgery. Surgery to reduce the size of your stomach or to remove part of the intestine limits the amount of surface area available to absorb nutrients, including calcium. These surgeries include those to help you lose weight and for other gastrointestinal disorders.
Long-term use of oral or injected corticosteroid medications, such as prednisone and cortisone, interferes with the bone-rebuilding process. Osteoporosis has also been associated with medications used to combat or prevent: Seizures, Gastric reflux, Cancer, Transplant rejection.
The risk of osteoporosis is higher in people who have certain medical problems, including: Celiac disease, Inflammatory bowel disease, Kidney or liver disease, Cancer, Lupus, Multiple myeloma, Rheumatoid arthritis.
Some bad habits can increase your risk of osteoporosis. Examples include:
Sedentary lifestyle. People who spend a lot of time sitting have a higher risk of osteoporosis than do those who are more active. Any weight-bearing exercise and activities that promote balance and good posture are beneficial for your bones, but walking, running, jumping, dancing and weightlifting seem particularly helpful.
Excessive alcohol consumption. Regular consumption of more than two alcoholic drinks a day increases your risk of osteoporosis.
Tobacco use. The exact role tobacco plays in osteoporosis isn't clear, but it has been shown that tobacco use contributes to weak bones.
Bone fractures, particularly in the spine or hip, are the most serious complications of osteoporosis. Hip fractures often are caused by a fall and can result in disability and even an increased risk of death within the first year after the injury.
In some cases, spinal fractures can occur even if you haven't fallen. The bones that make up your spine (vertebrae) can weaken to the point of crumpling, which can result in back pain, lost height and a hunched forward posture.
Signs and symptoms of osteosarcoma may include, among others: Swelling near a bone, Bone or joint pain, Bone injury or bone break for no clear reason.
Make an appointment with your child's doctor if your child has any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you. Osteosarcoma symptoms are similar to many more-common conditions, such as sports injuries, so your doctor may investigate those causes first.
It's not clear what causes osteosarcoma. Doctors know this cancer forms when something goes wrong in one of the cells that are responsible for making new bone.
Osteosarcoma begins when a healthy bone cell develops changes in its DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The changes tell the cell to start making new bone when it isn't needed. The result is a mass (tumor) of poorly formed bone cells that can invade and destroy healthy body tissue. Cells can break away and spread (metastasize) throughout the body.
These factors increase the risk of osteosarcoma: Previous treatment with radiation therapy, Other bone disorders, such as Paget's disease of bone and fibrous dysplasia, Certain inherited or genetic conditions, including hereditary retinoblastoma, Bloom syndrome, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Rothmund-Thomson syndrome and Werner syndrome.
Complications of osteosarcoma and its treatment include:
Cancer that spreads (metastasizes). Osteosarcoma can spread from where it started to other areas, making treatment and recovery more difficult. Osteosarcoma that spreads most often spreads to the lungs and to other bones.
Adapting to limb amputation. Surgery that removes the tumor and spares the limb is used whenever possible. But sometimes it's necessary to remove part of the affected limb in order to remove all of the cancer. Learning to use an artificial limb (prosthesis) will take time, practice and patience. Experts can help you adapt.
Long-term treatment side effects. The aggressive chemotherapy needed to control osteosarcoma can cause substantial side effects, both in the short and long term. Your health care team can help you manage the side effects that happen during treatment and provide you with a list of side effects to watch for in the years after treatment.
Early-stage ovarian cancer rarely causes any symptoms. Advanced-stage ovarian cancer may cause few and nonspecific symptoms that are often mistaken for more common benign conditions.
Signs and symptoms of ovarian cancer may include: Abdominal bloating or swelling, Quickly feeling full when eating, Weight loss, Discomfort in the pelvis area, Changes in bowel habits, such as constipation, A frequent need to urinate.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you.
If you have a family history of ovarian cancer or breast cancer, talk to your doctor about your risk of ovarian cancer. Your doctor may refer you to a genetic counselor to discuss testing for certain gene mutations that increase your risk of breast and ovarian cancers.
It's not clear what causes ovarian cancer, though doctors have identified factors that can increase the risk of the disease.
In general, cancer begins when a cell develops errors (mutations) in its DNA. The mutations tell the cell to grow and multiply quickly, creating a mass (tumor) of abnormal cells. The abnormal cells continue living when healthy cells would die. They can invade nearby tissues and break off from an initial tumor to spread elsewhere in the body (metastasize).
The type of cell where the cancer begins determines the type of ovarian cancer you have. Ovarian cancer types include:
Epithelial tumors, which begin in the thin layer of tissue that covers the outside of the ovaries. About 90 percent of ovarian cancers are epithelial tumors.
Stromal tumors, which begin in the ovarian tissue that contains hormone-producing cells. These tumors are usually diagnosed at an earlier stage than other ovarian tumors. About 7 percent of ovarian tumors are stromal.
Germ cell tumors, which begin in the egg-producing cells. These rare ovarian cancers tend to occur in younger women.
Factors that can increase your risk of ovarian cancer include:
Older age. Ovarian cancer can occur at any age but is most common in women ages 50 to 60 years.
Inherited gene mutations. A small percentage of ovarian cancers are caused by gene mutations you inherit from your parents. The genes known to increase the risk of ovarian cancer are called breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) and breast cancer gene 2 (BRCA2). These genes also increase the risk of breast cancer.
Other gene mutations, including those associated with Lynch syndrome, are known to increase the risk of ovarian cancer.
Family history of ovarian cancer. People with two or more close relatives with ovarian cancer have an increased risk of the disease.
Estrogen hormone replacement therapy, especially with long-term use and in large doses.
Age when menstruation started and ended. Beginning menstruation at an early age or starting menopause at a later age, or both, may increase the risk of ovarian cancer.
Most cysts don't cause symptoms and go away on their own. However, a large ovarian cyst can cause: Pelvic pain — a dull or sharp ache in the lower abdomen on the side of the cyst, Fullness or heaviness in your abdomen, Bloating.
Seek immediate medical attention if you have: Sudden, severe abdominal or pelvic pain, Pain with fever or vomiting.
If you have these signs and symptoms or those of shock — cold, clammy skin; rapid breathing; and lightheadedness or weakness — see a doctor right away.
Most ovarian cysts develop as a result of your menstrual cycle (functional cysts). Other types of cysts are much less common.
Your ovaries normally grow cyst-like structures called follicles each month. Follicles produce the hormones estrogen and progesterone and release an egg when you ovulate.
If a normal monthly follicle keeps growing, it's known as a functional cyst. There are two types of functional cysts:
Follicular cyst. Around the midpoint of your menstrual cycle, an egg bursts out of its follicle and travels down the fallopian tube. A follicular cyst begins when the follicle doesn't rupture or release its egg, but continues to grow.
Corpus luteum cyst. When a follicle releases its egg, it begins producing estrogen and progesterone for conception. This follicle is now called the corpus luteum. Sometimes, fluid accumulates inside the follicle, causing the corpus luteum to grow into a cyst.
Functional cysts are usually harmless, rarely cause pain, and often disappear on their own within two or three menstrual cycles.
Types of cysts not related to the normal function of your menstrual cycle include:
Dermoid cysts. Also called teratomas, these can contain tissue, such as hair, skin or teeth, because they form from embryonic cells. They're rarely cancerous.
Cystadenomas. These develop on the surface of an ovary and might be filled with a watery or a mucous material.
Endometriomas. These develop as a result of a condition in which uterine endometrial cells grow outside your uterus (endometriosis). Some of the tissue can attach to your ovary and form a growth.
Dermoid cysts and cystadenomas can become large, causing the ovary to move out of position. This increases the chance of painful twisting of your ovary, called ovarian torsion. Ovarian torsion may also result in decreasing or stopping blood flow to the ovary.
Your risk of developing an ovarian cyst is heightened by:
Hormonal problems. These include taking the fertility drug clomiphene (Clomid), which is used to cause you to ovulate.
Pregnancy. Sometimes, the cyst that forms when you ovulate stays on your ovary throughout your pregnancy.
Endometriosis. This condition causes uterine endometrial cells to grow outside your uterus. Some of the tissue can attach to your ovary and form a growth.
A severe pelvic infection. If the infection spreads to the ovaries, it can cause cysts.
A previous ovarian cyst. If you've had one, you're likely to develop more.
Some women develop less common types of cysts that a doctor finds during a pelvic exam. Cystic ovarian masses that develop after menopause might be cancerous (malignant). That's why it's important to have regular pelvic exams.
Infrequent complications associated with ovarian cysts include:
Ovarian torsion. Cysts that enlarge can cause the ovary to move, increasing the chance of painful twisting of your ovary (ovarian torsion). Symptoms can include an abrupt onset of severe pelvic pain, nausea and vomiting. Ovarian torsion can also decrease or stop blood flow to the ovaries.
Rupture. A cyst that ruptures can cause severe pain and internal bleeding. The larger the cyst, the greater the risk of rupture. Vigorous activity that affects the pelvis, such as vaginal intercourse, also increases the risk.
Symptoms of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome often begin within a week after using injectable medications to stimulate ovulation, though sometimes it can take two weeks or longer for symptoms to appear. Symptoms can range from mild to severe and may worsen or improve over time.
With mild to moderate ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, symptoms can include: Mild to moderate abdominal pain, Abdominal bloating or increased waist size, Nausea, Vomiting, Diarrhea, Tenderness in the area of your ovaries.
Some women who use injectable fertility drugs get a mild form of OHSS. This usually goes away after about a week. But, if pregnancy occurs, symptoms of OHSS may worsen and last several days to weeks.
With severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, you might have: Rapid weight gain — more than 2.2 pounds (1 kilogram) in 24 hours, Severe abdominal pain, Severe, persistent nausea and vomiting, Blood clots, Decreased urination, Shortness of breath, Tight or enlarged abdomen.
If you're having fertility treatments and you experience symptoms of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, tell your doctor. Even if you have a mild case of OHSS, your doctor will want to observe you for sudden weight gain or worsening symptoms.
Contact your doctor right away if you develop breathing problems or pain in your legs during your fertility treatment. This may indicate an urgent situation that needs prompt medical attention.
The cause of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome isn't fully understood. Having a high level of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) — a hormone usually produced during pregnancy — introduced into your system plays a role. Ovarian blood vessels react abnormally to HCG and begin to leak fluid. This fluid swells the ovaries, and sometimes large amounts move into the abdomen.
During fertility treatments, HCG may be given as a "trigger" so that a mature follicle will release its egg. OHSS usually happens within a week after you receive an HCG injection. If you become pregnant during a treatment cycle, OHSS may worsen as your body begins producing its own HCG in response to the pregnancy.
Injectable fertility medications are more likely to cause OHSS than is treatment with clomiphene, a medication given as a pill you take by mouth. Occasionally OHSS occurs spontaneously, not related to fertility treatments.
Sometimes, OHSS happens in women with no risk factors at all. But factors that are known to increase your risk of OHSS include: Polycystic ovary syndrome — a common reproductive disorder that causes irregular menstrual periods, excess hair growth and unusual appearance of the ovaries on ultrasound examination, Large number of follicles, Age under 35, Low body weight, High or steeply increasing level of estradiol (estrogen) before an HCG trigger shot, Previous episodes of OHSS.
Severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome is uncommon, but can be life-threatening. Complications may include: Fluid collection in the abdomen and sometimes the chest, Electrolyte disturbances (sodium, potassium, others), Blood clots in large vessels, usually in the legs, Kidney failure, Twisting of an ovary (ovarian torsion), Rupture of a cyst in an ovary, which can lead to serious bleeding, Breathing problems, Pregnancy loss from miscarriage or termination because of complications, Rarely, death.
If you have an overactive bladder, you may: Feel a sudden urge to urinate that's difficult to control, Experience unintentional loss of urine immediately after an urgent need to urinate (urgency incontinence), Urinate frequently, usually eight or more times in 24 hours, Wake up more than two times in the night to urinate (nocturia).
Even if you are able to get to the toilet in time when you sense an urge to urinate, unexpected frequent urination and nighttime urination can disrupt your life.
Although it's not uncommon among older adults, overactive bladder isn't a normal part of aging. It might not be easy to discuss your symptoms, but if they are distressing you or disrupting your life, talk to your doctor. Treatments are available that might help you.
The kidneys produce urine, which drains into your bladder. When you urinate, urine passes from your bladder through a tube called the urethra (u-REE-thruh). A muscle in the urethra called the sphincter opens to release urine out of the body.
In women, the urethral opening is located just above the vaginal opening. In men, the urethral opening is at the tip of the penis.
As your bladder fills, nerve signals sent to your brain eventually trigger the need to urinate. When you urinate, these nerve signals coordinate the relaxation of the pelvic floor muscles and the muscles of the urethra (urinary sphincter muscles). The muscles of the bladder tighten (contract), pushing the urine out.
Overactive bladder occurs because the muscles of the bladder start to contract involuntarily even when the volume of urine in your bladder is low. These involuntary contractions create an urgent need to urinate.
Several conditions may contribute to signs and symptoms of overactive bladder, including: Neurological disorders, such as stroke and multiple sclerosis, Diabetes, Urinary tract infections that can cause symptoms similar to those of an overactive bladder, Hormonal changes during menopause in women, Abnormalities in the bladder, such as tumors or bladder stones, Factors that obstruct bladder outflow — enlarged prostate, constipation or previous operations to treat other forms of incontinence.
Other factors that may be associated with your symptoms include: Medications that cause a rapid increase in urine production or require that you take them with lots of fluids, Excess consumption of caffeine or alcohol, Declining cognitive function due to aging, which may make it more difficult for your bladder to understand the signals it receives from your brain, Difficulty walking, which can lead to bladder urgency if you're unable to get to the bathroom quickly, Incomplete bladder emptying, which may lead to symptoms of overactive bladder, as you have little urine storage space left.
The specific cause of an overactive bladder may be unknown.
As you age, you're at increased risk of developing overactive bladder. You're also at higher risk of diseases and disorders, such as enlarged prostate and diabetes, which can contribute to other problems with bladder function.
Many people with cognitive decline — for instance, those who have had a stroke or have Alzheimer's disease — develop an overactive bladder. Incontinence that results from situations like this can be managed with fluid schedules, timed and prompted voiding, absorbent garments, and bowel programs.
Some people with an overactive bladder also have bowel control problems; tell your doctor if this is a problem for you.
Any type of incontinence can affect your overall quality of life. If your overactive bladder symptoms cause disruption to your life, you might also have: Emotional distress or depression, Anxiety, Sleep disturbances and interrupted sleep cycles, Issues with sexuality.
In some cases, treatment of these associated conditions may help with your urinary symptoms.
Women who have an overactive bladder may also have a disorder called mixed incontinence, when both urgency and stress incontinence occur. Stress incontinence is the unintentional loss of urine prompted by physical movement or activity that puts pressure on your bladder, such as coughing, sneezing, laughing or exercising. Treatment of stress incontinence is not likely to help overactive bladder symptoms. Similarly, treatment of overactive bladder is not likely to improve stress incontinence symptoms.
Some people may have a common combination of bladder storage problems and bladder-emptying issues. The bladder may cause a lot of urgency and even incontinence, but it doesn't empty well. A specialist may be able to help you with this combination of bladder problems.
Most people who have Paget's disease of bone have no symptoms. When symptoms occur, the most common complaint is bone pain.
Because this disease causes your body to generate new bone faster than normal, the rapid remodeling produces bone that's softer and weaker than normal bone, which can lead to bone pain, deformities and fractures.
The disease might affect only one or two areas of your body or might be widespread. Your signs and symptoms, if any, will depend on the affected part of your body.
Pelvis. Paget's disease of bone in the pelvis can cause hip pain.
Skull. An overgrowth of bone in the skull can cause hearing loss or headaches.
Spine. If your spine is affected, nerve roots can become compressed. This can cause pain, tingling and numbness in an arm or leg.
Leg. As the bones weaken, they may bend — causing you to become bowlegged. Enlarged and misshapen bones in your legs can put extra stress on nearby joints, which may cause osteoarthritis in your knee or hip.
Talk to your doctor if you have: Pain in your bones and joints, Tingling and weakness in an extremity, Bone deformities, Unexplained hearing loss, especially if only on one side.
The cause of Paget's disease of bone is unknown. Scientists suspect a combination of environmental and genetic factors contribute to the disease. Several genes appear to be linked to getting the disease.
Some scientists believe Paget's disease of bone is related to a viral infection in your bone cells, but this theory is controversial.
Factors that can increase your risk of Paget's disease of bone include:
Age. People older than 40 are most likely to develop Paget's disease of bone.
Sex. Men are more commonly affected than are women.
National origin. Paget's disease of bone is more common in England, Scotland, central Europe and Greece — as well as countries settled by European immigrants. It's uncommon in Scandinavia and Asia.
Family history. If you have a relative who has Paget's disease of bone, you're more likely to develop the condition.
In most cases, Paget's disease of bone progresses slowly. The disease can be managed effectively in nearly all people. Possible complications include:
Fractures and deformities. Affected bones break more easily. Extra blood vessels in these deformed bones cause them to bleed more during repair surgeries. Leg bones can bow, which can affect your ability to walk.
Osteoarthritis. Misshapen bones can increase the amount of stress on nearby joints, which can cause osteoarthritis.
Neurologic problems. When Paget's disease of bone occurs in an area where nerves pass through the bone, such as the spine and skull, the overgrowth of bone can compress and damage the nerve, causing pain, weakness or tingling in an arm or leg or hearing loss.
Heart failure. Extensive Paget's disease of bone may force your heart to work harder to pump blood to the affected areas of your body. Sometimes, this increased workload can lead to heart failure.
Bone cancer. Bone cancer occurs in about 1 percent of people with Paget's disease of bone.
Paget's disease of the breast affects your nipple and usually the skin (areola) surrounding it. It's easy to mistake the signs and symptoms of Paget's disease of the breast for skin irritation (dermatitis) or another noncancerous (benign) skin condition.
Possible signs and symptoms of Paget's disease of the breast include: Flaky or scaly skin on your nipple, Crusty, oozing or hardened skin resembling eczema on the nipple, areola or both, Itching, Redness, A tingling or burning sensation, Straw-colored or bloody nipple discharge, A flattened or turned-in (inverted) nipple, A lump in the breast, Thickening skin on the breast.
Signs and symptoms usually occur in one breast only. The disease typically starts in the nipple and may spread to the areola and other areas of the breast.
The skin changes may come and go early on, or respond to topical treatment, making it appear as if your skin is healing. On average, women experience signs and symptoms for several months before getting a diagnosis.
Be aware of any changes in your breasts. If you feel a lump in your breast, or if you experience itching or skin irritation that persists for more than a month, make an appointment with your doctor.
If you're being treated for a skin injury on your breast, and the condition doesn't go away with treatment, make a follow-up appointment with your doctor. You may need a biopsy — a procedure that collects a small tissue sample for microscopic analysis — to evaluate the affected area.
Doctors don't know what causes Paget's disease of the breast. The most widely accepted theory is that the disease results from an underlying ductal breast cancer. The cancer cells from the original tumor then travel through milk ducts to the nipple and its surrounding skin. Another theory is that the disease can develop independently in the nipple.
Risk factors that affect your likelihood of developing Paget's disease of the breast are the same factors that affect your risk of developing any other type of breast cancer.
Some factors that make you more susceptible to breast cancer include:
Age. Your chances of developing breast cancer increase as you get older.
A personal history of breast cancer. If you've had breast cancer in one breast, you have an increased risk of developing cancer in the other breast.
A personal history of breast abnormalities. If you've had lobular carcinoma in situ or atypical hyperplasia, your risk of developing breast cancer is higher. Certain benign breast conditions also are associated with a slightly increased risk.
Family history. If you have a mother, sister or daughter with breast or ovarian cancer or both, or even a father or brother with breast cancer, you have a greater chance of developing breast cancer.
An inherited gene mutation that increases the risk of breast cancer. Defects in one of several genes, especially BRCA1 or BRCA2, put you at greater risk of developing breast cancer as well as ovarian and other cancers. Such defects account for fewer than 1 out of 10 breast cancers.
Dense breast tissue. Women with dense breast tissue, as seen on a mammogram, face a higher risk of breast cancer.
Radiation exposure. If you received radiation treatments to your chest as a child or young adult to treat another cancer, you're more likely to develop breast cancer later in life.
Excess weight. Weighing more than is healthy for your age and height increases your risk of breast cancer — especially after menopause and if you gained weight as an adult.
Hormone replacement. Taking estrogen after menopause increases the risk of breast cancer for some women.
Race. White women are more likely to develop breast cancer than black or Hispanic women, but black women are more likely to die of the disease.
Alcohol. Drinking large amounts of alcohol increases your risk of developing breast cancer.
Having one or more risk factors doesn't necessarily mean you'll develop breast cancer. Most women with breast cancer have no known risk factors.
If you have painful intercourse, you might feel: Pain only at sexual entry (penetration), Pain with every penetration, including putting in a tampon, Deep pain during thrusting, Burning pain or aching pain, Throbbing pain, lasting hours after intercourse.
If you have recurrent pain during sex, talk to your doctor. Treating the problem can help your sex life, your emotional intimacy and your self-image.
Physical causes of painful intercourse differ, depending on whether the pain occurs at entry or with deep thrusting. Emotional factors might be associated with many types of painful intercourse.
Pain during penetration might be associated with a range of factors, including:
Not enough lubrication. This is often the result of not enough foreplay. A drop in estrogen levels after menopause or childbirth or during breast-feeding also can be a cause.
Certain medications are known to affect sexual desire or arousal, which can decrease lubrication and make sex painful. These include antidepressants, high blood pressure medications, sedatives, antihistamines and certain birth control pills.
Injury, trauma or irritation. This includes injury or irritation from an accident, pelvic surgery, female circumcision or a cut made during childbirth to enlarge the birth canal (episiotomy).
Inflammation, infection or skin disorder. An infection in your genital area or urinary tract can cause painful intercourse. Eczema or other skin problems in your genital area also can be the problem.
Vaginismus. These involuntary spasms of the muscles of the vaginal wall can make penetration painful.
Congenital abnormality. A problem present at birth, such as the absence of a fully formed vagina (vaginal agenesis) or development of a membrane that blocks the vaginal opening (imperforate hymen), could cause dyspareunia.
Deep pain usually occurs with deep penetration. It might be worse in certain positions. Causes include:
Certain illnesses and conditions. The list includes endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, uterine prolapse, retroverted uterus, uterine fibroids, cystitis, irritable bowel syndrome, pelvic floor dysfunction, adenomyosis, hemorrhoids and ovarian cysts.
Surgeries or medical treatments. Scarring from pelvic surgery, including hysterectomy, can cause painful intercourse. Medical treatments for cancer, such as radiation and chemotherapy, can cause changes that make sex painful.
Emotions are deeply intertwined with sexual activity, so they might play a role in sexual pain. Emotional factors include:
Psychological issues. Anxiety, depression, concerns about your physical appearance, fear of intimacy or relationship problems can contribute to a low level of arousal and a resulting discomfort or pain.
Stress. Your pelvic floor muscles tend to tighten in response to stress in your life. This can contribute to pain during intercourse.
History of sexual abuse. Not everyone with dyspareunia has a history of sexual abuse, but if you have been abused, it can play a role.
It can be difficult to tell whether emotional factors are associated with dyspareunia. Initial pain can lead to fear of recurring pain, making it difficult to relax, which can lead to more pain. You might start avoiding sexual intercourse if you associate it with the pain.
Signs and symptoms of pancreatic cancer often don't occur until the disease is advanced. They may include: Abdominal pain that radiates to your back, Loss of appetite or unintended weight loss, Yellowing of your skin and the whites of your eyes (jaundice), Light-colored stools, Dark-colored urine, Itchy skin, New diagnosis of diabetes or existing diabetes that's becoming more difficult to control, Blood clots, Fatigue.
See your doctor if you experience any unexplained symptoms that worry you. Many other conditions can cause these symptoms, so your doctor may check for these conditions as well as for pancreatic cancer.
It's not clear what causes pancreatic cancer. Doctors have identified some factors that may increase the risk of this type of cancer, including smoking and having certain inherited gene mutations.
Your pancreas is about 6 inches (15 centimeters) long and looks something like a pear lying on its side. It releases (secretes) hormones, including insulin, to help your body process sugar in the foods you eat. And it produces digestive juices to help your body digest food and absorb nutrients.
Pancreatic cancer occurs when cells in your pancreas develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. These mutations tell the cells to grow uncontrollably and to continue living after normal cells would die. These accumulating cells can form a tumor. When left untreated, the pancreatic cancer cells can spread to nearby organs and blood vessels and to distant parts of the body.
Most pancreatic cancer begins in the cells that line the ducts of the pancreas. This type of cancer is called pancreatic adenocarcinoma or pancreatic exocrine cancer. Less frequently, cancer can form in the hormone-producing cells or the neuroendocrine cells of the pancreas. These types of cancer are called pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, islet cell tumors or pancreatic endocrine cancer.
Factors that may increase your risk of pancreatic cancer include: Smoking, Diabetes, Chronic inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), Family history of genetic syndromes that can increase cancer risk, including a BRCA2 gene mutation, Lynch syndrome and familial atypical mole-malignant melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome, Family history of pancreatic cancer, Obesity, Older age, as most people are diagnosed after age 65.
A large study demonstrated that the combination of smoking, long-standing diabetes and a poor diet increases the risk of pancreatic cancer beyond the risk of any one of these factors alone.
As pancreatic cancer progresses, it can cause complications such as:
Weight loss. A number of factors may cause weight loss in people with pancreatic cancer. Weight loss might happen as the cancer consumes the body's energy. Nausea and vomiting caused by cancer treatments or a tumor pressing on your stomach may make it difficult to eat. Or your body may have difficulty processing nutrients from food because your pancreas isn't making enough digestive juices.
Jaundice. Pancreatic cancer that blocks the liver's bile duct can cause jaundice. Signs include yellow skin and eyes, dark-colored urine, and pale-colored stools. Jaundice usually occurs without abdominal pain.
Your doctor may recommend that a plastic or metal tube (stent) be placed inside the bile duct to hold it open. This is done with the help of a procedure called endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). During ERCP an endoscope is passed down your throat, through your stomach and into the upper part of your small intestine. A dye is then injected into the pancreatic and bile ducts through a small hollow tube (catheter) that's passed through the endoscope. Finally, images are taken of the ducts.
Pain. A growing tumor may press on nerves in your abdomen, causing pain that can become severe. Pain medications can help you feel more comfortable. Treatments, such as radiation and chemotherapy, might help slow tumor growth and provide some pain relief.
In severe cases, your doctor might recommend a procedure to inject alcohol into the nerves that control pain in your abdomen (celiac plexus block). This procedure stops the nerves from sending pain signals to your brain.
Bowel obstruction. Pancreatic cancer that grows into or presses on the first part of the small intestine (duodenum) can block the flow of digested food from your stomach into your intestines.
Your doctor may recommend that a tube (stent) be placed in your small intestine to hold it open. In some situations, it might help to have surgery to place a temporary feeding tube or to attach your stomach to a lower point in your intestines that isn't blocked by cancer.
You may not have symptoms from pancreatic cysts, which are often found when imaging tests of the abdomen are done for another reason.
When signs or symptoms of pancreatic cysts do occur, they typically include: Persistent abdominal pain, which may radiate to your back, Nausea and vomiting, Weight loss, Feeling full soon after you start eating.
Rarely, cysts can become infected. See a doctor if you have a fever and persistent abdominal pain.
A ruptured pancreatic cyst can be a medical emergency, but fortunately is rare. A ruptured cyst can also cause infection of the abdominal cavity (peritonitis).
The cause of most pancreatic cysts is unknown. Some cysts are associated with rare illnesses, including polycystic kidney disease or von Hippel-Lindau disease, a genetic disorder that can affect the pancreas and other organs.
Pseudocysts often follow a bout of a painful condition in which digestive enzymes become prematurely active and irritate the pancreas (pancreatitis). Pseudocysts can also result from injury to the abdomen, such as from a car accident.
Heavy alcohol use and gallstones are risk factors for pancreatitis, and pancreatitis is a risk factor for pseudocysts. Abdominal injury is also a risk factor for pseudocysts.
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors sometimes don't cause symptoms. When they do, signs and symptoms can include: Stomach ulcers, Heartburn, Diabetes, Weakness, Fatigue, Muscle cramps, Indigestion, Diarrhea, Weight loss, Skin rash, Constipation, Pain in your abdomen or back, Yellowing of your skin or eyes, Low blood sugar.
It's not clear what causes most pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors occur when hormone-producing cells in the pancreas (islet cells) develop changes (mutations) in their DNA — the material that provides instructions for every chemical process in your body. DNA mutations cause changes in these instructions. One result is that cells may begin to grow out of control and eventually form a tumor — a mass of cancerous cells. Sometimes the cancer cells break away and spread to other organs, such as the liver.
Some inherited syndromes increase the risk of this type of cancer, including: Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1 (MEN 1) syndrome, Von Hippel-Lindau disease, Von Recklinghausen's disease (neurofibromatosis 1), Tuberous sclerosis.
Factors that are associated with an increased risk of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors include:
Being male. Men are much more likely than women to develop these tumors.
A family history of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. If a family member was diagnosed with pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, your risk is increased. You may have multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1 (MEN 1) syndrome, which increases the risk of this type of tumor.
Signs and symptoms of pancreatitis may vary, depending on which type you experience.
Acute pancreatitis signs and symptoms include: Upper abdominal pain, Abdominal pain that radiates to your back, Abdominal pain that feels worse after eating, Fever, Rapid pulse, Nausea, Vomiting, Tenderness when touching the abdomen.
Chronic pancreatitis signs and symptoms include: Upper abdominal pain, Losing weight without trying, Oily, smelly stools (steatorrhea).
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have persistent abdominal pain. Seek immediate medical help if your abdominal pain is so severe that you can't sit still or find a position that makes you more comfortable.
Pancreatitis occurs when digestive enzymes become activated while still in the pancreas, irritating the cells of your pancreas and causing inflammation.
With repeated bouts of acute pancreatitis, damage to the pancreas can occur and lead to chronic pancreatitis. Scar tissue may form in the pancreas, causing loss of function. A poorly functioning pancreas can cause digestion problems and diabetes.
Conditions that can lead to pancreatitis include: Abdominal surgery, Alcoholism, Certain medications, Cystic fibrosis, Gallstones, High calcium levels in the blood (hypercalcemia), which may be caused by an overactive parathyroid gland (hyperparathyroidism), High triglyceride levels in the blood (hypertriglyceridemia), Infection, Injury to the abdomen, Obesity, Pancreatic cancer.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), a procedure used to treat gallstones, also can lead to pancreatitis.
Sometimes, a cause for pancreatitis is never found.
Factors that increase your risk of pancreatitis include:
Excessive alcohol consumption. Research shows that heavy alcohol users (people who consume four to five drinks a day) are at increased risk of pancreatitis.
Cigarette smoking. Smokers are on average three times more likely to develop chronic pancreatitis, compared with nonsmokers. The good news is quitting smoking decreases your risk by about half
Obesity. You're more likely to get pancreatitis if you're obese.
Family history of pancreatitis. The role of genetics is becoming increasingly recognized in chronic pancreatitis. If you have family members with the condition, your odds increase — especially when combined with other risk factors.
Pancreatitis can cause serious complications, including:
Pseudocyst. Acute pancreatitis can cause fluid and debris to collect in cystlike pockets in your pancreas. A large pseudocyst that ruptures can cause complications such as internal bleeding and infection.
Infection. Acute pancreatitis can make your pancreas vulnerable to bacteria and infection. Pancreatic infections are serious and require intensive treatment, such as surgery to remove the infected tissue.
Kidney failure. Acute pancreatitis may cause kidney failure, which can be treated with dialysis if the kidney failure is severe and persistent.
Breathing problems. Acute pancreatitis can cause chemical changes in your body that affect your lung function, causing the level of oxygen in your blood to fall to dangerously low levels.
Diabetes. Damage to insulin-producing cells in your pancreas from chronic pancreatitis can lead to diabetes, a disease that affects the way your body uses blood sugar.
Malnutrition. Both acute and chronic pancreatitis can cause your pancreas to produce fewer of the enzymes that are needed to break down and process nutrients from the food you eat. This can lead to malnutrition, diarrhea and weight loss, even though you may be eating the same foods or the same amount of food.
Pancreatic cancer. Long-standing inflammation in your pancreas caused by chronic pancreatitis is a risk factor for developing pancreatic cancer.
Panic attacks typically begin suddenly, without warning. They can strike at any time — when you're driving a car, at the mall, sound asleep or in the middle of a business meeting. You may have occasional panic attacks, or they may occur frequently.
Panic attacks have many variations, but symptoms usually peak within minutes. You may feel fatigued and worn out after a panic attack subsides.
Panic attacks typically include some of these signs or symptoms: Sense of impending doom or danger, Fear of loss of control or death, Rapid, pounding heart rate, Sweating, Trembling or shaking, Shortness of breath or tightness in your throat, Chills, Hot flashes, Nausea, Abdominal cramping, Chest pain, Headache, Dizziness, lightheadedness or faintness, Numbness or tingling sensation, Feeling of unreality or detachment.
One of the worst things about panic attacks is the intense fear that you'll have another one. You may fear having panic attacks so much that you avoid certain situations where they may occur.
If you have panic attack symptoms, seek medical help as soon as possible. Panic attacks, while intensely uncomfortable, are not dangerous. But panic attacks are hard to manage on your own, and they may get worse without treatment.
Panic attack symptoms can also resemble symptoms of other serious health problems, such as a heart attack, so it's important to get evaluated by your primary care provider if you aren't sure what's causing your symptoms.
It's not known what causes panic attacks or panic disorder, but these factors may play a role: Genetics, Major stress, Temperament that is more sensitive to stress or prone to negative emotions, Certain changes in the way parts of your brain function.
Panic attacks may come on suddenly and without warning at first, but over time, they're usually triggered by certain situations.
Some research suggests that your body's natural fight-or-flight response to danger is involved in panic attacks. For example, if a grizzly bear came after you, your body would react instinctively. Your heart rate and breathing would speed up as your body prepared for a life-threatening situation. Many of the same reactions occur in a panic attack. But it's unknown why a panic attack occurs when there's no obvious danger present.
Symptoms of panic disorder often start in the late teens or early adulthood and affect more women than men.
Factors that may increase the risk of developing panic attacks or panic disorder include: Family history of panic attacks or panic disorder, Major life stress, such as the death or serious illness of a loved one, A traumatic event, such as sexual assault or a serious accident, Major changes in your life, such as a divorce or the addition of a baby, Smoking or excessive caffeine intake, History of childhood physical or sexual abuse.
Left untreated, panic attacks and panic disorder can affect almost every area of your life. You may be so afraid of having more panic attacks that you live in a constant state of fear, ruining your quality of life.
Complications that panic attacks may cause or be linked to include: Development of specific phobias, such as fear of driving or leaving your home, Frequent medical care for health concerns and other medical conditions, Avoidance of social situations, Problems at work or school, Depression, anxiety disorders and other psychiatric disorders, Increased risk of suicide or suicidal thoughts, Alcohol or other substance misuse, Financial problems.
For some people, panic disorder may include agoraphobia — avoiding places or situations that cause you anxiety because you fear being unable to escape or get help if you have a panic attack. Or you may become reliant on others to be with you in order to leave your home.
Signs and symptoms of paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system can develop relatively quickly, often over days to weeks. Signs and symptoms of paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system often begin even before a cancer is diagnosed.
Signs and symptoms vary depending on the body part being injured, and may include: Difficulty walking, Difficulty maintaining balance, Loss of muscle coordination, Loss of muscle tone or weakness, Loss of fine motor skills, such as picking up objects, Difficulty swallowing, Slurred speech or stuttering, Memory loss and other thinking (cognitive) impairment, Vision problems, Sleep disturbances, Seizures, Hallucinations, Unusual involuntary movements.
Examples of paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system include:
Cerebellar degeneration. This is the loss of nerve cells in the area of the brain that controls muscle functions and balance (cerebellum). Signs and symptoms may include unsteady or impaired walking, lack of muscle coordination in your limbs, inability to maintain your trunk posture, dizziness, nausea, involuntary eye movement, double vision, difficulty speaking, or difficulty swallowing.
Limbic encephalitis. This is inflammation affecting a region of the brain known as the limbic system, which controls emotions, behaviors and certain memory functions. People with this disorder may experience personality changes or mood disturbances, memory loss, seizures, hallucinations, or drowsiness.
Encephalomyelitis. This syndrome refers to inflammation of the brain and spinal cord. There may be a wide variety of symptoms and signs depending on the area affected.
Opsoclonus-myoclonus. This syndrome is due to dysfunction of the cerebellum or its connections. It can cause rapid, irregular eye movements (opsoclonus) and involuntary, chaotic muscle jerks (myoclonus) in your limbs and trunk.
Stiff person syndrome. Previously called stiff man syndrome, this syndrome is characterized by progressive, severe muscle stiffness or rigidity, mainly affecting your spine and legs. It may also cause painful muscle spasms.
Myelopathy. This term refers to a syndrome of injury limited to the spinal cord. Depending on the level of spinal cord injury, you may have changes in bowel and bladder function, and severe weakness and numbness up to a certain level in your body. If the level of injury includes your neck, you can have severe disability affecting all four limbs.
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. This is a syndrome caused by disrupted communication between nerves and muscles. Signs and symptoms include pelvic and lower extremity muscle weakness, fatigue, difficulty swallowing, difficulty speaking, irregular eye movement, and double vision. Autonomic nervous system problems can include dry mouth and impotence.
When it occurs as a paraneoplastic syndrome, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is typically associated with lung cancer.
Myasthenia gravis. Myasthenia gravis is also related to disrupted communication between nerves and muscles and also characterized by weakness and rapid fatigue of any of the muscles that are under voluntary control, including muscles in your face, eyes, arms and legs. The muscles involved in chewing, swallowing, talking and breathing may be affected as well.
When myasthenia gravis occurs as a paraneoplastic syndrome, it is typically associated with cancer of the thymus gland (thymoma).
Neuromyotonia. Neuromyotonia — also known as Isaacs' syndrome — is characterized by abnormal impulses in nerve cells outside the brain and spinal cord (peripheral nerve hyperexcitability) that control muscle movement. These impulses can cause twitching, muscle rippling that looks like a "bag of worms," progressive stiffness, muscle cramps, slowed movement and other muscle impairments.
Peripheral neuropathy. This condition refers to patterns of damage to nerves that transmit messages from the brain or spinal column to the rest of your body. When damage involves only the sensory nerves of the peripheral nervous system, you can have pain and disturbances in sensation anywhere in your body.
Dysautonomia. Dysautonomia refers to a wide range of signs and symptoms resulting from injury to the nerves that regulate involuntary body functions (autonomic nervous system), such as heart rate, blood pressure, sweating, and bowel and bladder functions. When this part of the nervous system is affected, common symptoms are low blood pressure, irregular heartbeats and trouble breathing.
The signs and symptoms of paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system are similar to those of many conditions, including cancer, cancer complications and even some cancer treatments.
But if you have any signs or symptoms suggesting a paraneoplastic syndrome, see your doctor as soon as possible. Early diagnosis and appropriate care can be extremely important.
Paraneoplastic syndromes are not caused by cancer cells directly disrupting nerve function, by the cancer spreading (metastasis), or by other complications such as infections or treatment side effects. Instead, they occur alongside the cancer as a result of the activation of your immune system.
Researchers believe that paraneoplastic syndromes are caused by cancer-fighting abilities of the immune system, particularly antibodies and certain white blood cells, known as T cells. Instead of attacking only the cancer cells, these immune system agents also attack the normal cells of the nervous system and cause neurological disorders.
Any cancer may be associated with a paraneoplastic syndrome of the nervous system. However, the disorders occur more often in people with cancers of the lung, ovary, breast, testis or lymphatic system.
Parkinson's disease signs and symptoms can be different for everyone. Early signs may be mild and go unnoticed. Symptoms often begin on one side of your body and usually remain worse on that side, even after symptoms begin to affect both sides.
Parkinson's signs and symptoms may include:
Tremor. A tremor, or shaking, usually begins in a limb, often your hand or fingers. You may rub your thumb and forefinger back and forth, known as a pill-rolling tremor. Your hand may tremble when it's at rest.
Slowed movement (bradykinesia). Over time, Parkinson's disease may slow your movement, making simple tasks difficult and time-consuming. Your steps may become shorter when you walk. It may be difficult to get out of a chair. You may drag your feet as you try to walk.
Rigid muscles. Muscle stiffness may occur in any part of your body. The stiff muscles can be painful and limit your range of motion.
Impaired posture and balance. Your posture may become stooped, or you may have balance problems as a result of Parkinson's disease.
Loss of automatic movements. You may have a decreased ability to perform unconscious movements, including blinking, smiling or swinging your arms when you walk.
Speech changes. You may speak softly, quickly, slur or hesitate before talking. Your speech may be more of a monotone rather than have the usual inflections.
Writing changes. It may become hard to write, and your writing may appear small.
See your doctor if you have any of the symptoms associated with Parkinson's disease — not only to diagnose your condition but also to rule out other causes for your symptoms.
In Parkinson's disease, certain nerve cells (neurons) in the brain gradually break down or die. Many of the symptoms are due to a loss of neurons that produce a chemical messenger in your brain called dopamine. When dopamine levels decrease, it causes abnormal brain activity, leading to impaired movement and other symptoms of Parkinson's disease.
The cause of Parkinson's disease is unknown, but several factors appear to play a role, including:
Genes. Researchers have identified specific genetic mutations that can cause Parkinson's disease. But these are uncommon except in rare cases with many family members affected by Parkinson's disease.
However, certain gene variations appear to increase the risk of Parkinson's disease but with a relatively small risk of Parkinson's disease for each of these genetic markers.
Environmental triggers. Exposure to certain toxins or environmental factors may increase the risk of later Parkinson's disease, but the risk is relatively small.
Researchers have also noted that many changes occur in the brains of people with Parkinson's disease, although it's not clear why these changes occur. These changes include:
The presence of Lewy bodies. Clumps of specific substances within brain cells are microscopic markers of Parkinson's disease. These are called Lewy bodies, and researchers believe these Lewy bodies hold an important clue to the cause of Parkinson's disease.
Alpha-synuclein found within Lewy bodies. Although many substances are found within Lewy bodies, scientists believe an important one is the natural and widespread protein called alpha-synuclein (a-synuclein). It's found in all Lewy bodies in a clumped form that cells can't break down. This is currently an important focus among Parkinson's disease researchers.
Risk factors for Parkinson's disease include:
Age. Young adults rarely experience Parkinson's disease. It ordinarily begins in middle or late life, and the risk increases with age. People usually develop the disease around age 60 or older.
Heredity. Having a close relative with Parkinson's disease increases the chances that you'll develop the disease. However, your risks are still small unless you have many relatives in your family with Parkinson's disease.
Sex. Men are more likely to develop Parkinson's disease than are women.
Exposure to toxins. Ongoing exposure to herbicides and pesticides may slightly increase your risk of Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease is often accompanied by these additional problems, which may be treatable:
Thinking difficulties. You may experience cognitive problems (dementia) and thinking difficulties. These usually occur in the later stages of Parkinson's disease. Such cognitive problems aren't very responsive to medications.
Depression and emotional changes. You may experience depression, sometimes in the very early stages. Receiving treatment for depression can make it easier to handle the other challenges of Parkinson's disease.
You may also experience other emotional changes, such as fear, anxiety or loss of motivation. Doctors may give you medications to treat these symptoms.
Swallowing problems. You may develop difficulties with swallowing as your condition progresses. Saliva may accumulate in your mouth due to slowed swallowing, leading to drooling.
Chewing and eating problems. Late-stage Parkinson's disease affects the muscles in your mouth, making chewing difficult. This can lead to choking and poor nutrition.
Sleep problems and sleep disorders. People with Parkinson's disease often have sleep problems, including waking up frequently throughout the night, waking up early or falling asleep during the day.
People may also experience rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, which involves acting out your dreams. Medications may help your sleep problems.
Bladder problems. Parkinson's disease may cause bladder problems, including being unable to control urine or having difficulty urinating.
Constipation. Many people with Parkinson's disease develop constipation, mainly due to a slower digestive tract.
You may also experience:
Blood pressure changes. You may feel dizzy or lightheaded when you stand due to a sudden drop in blood pressure (orthostatic hypotension).
Smell dysfunction. You may experience problems with your sense of smell. You may have difficulty identifying certain odors or the difference between odors.
Fatigue. Many people with Parkinson's disease lose energy and experience fatigue, especially later in the day. The cause isn't always known.
Pain. Some people with Parkinson's disease experience pain, either in specific areas of their bodies or throughout their bodies.
Sexual dysfunction. Some people with Parkinson's disease notice a decrease in sexual desire or performance.
Most people with parvovirus infection have no signs or symptoms. When symptoms do appear, they vary greatly depending on how old you are when you get the disease.
Early signs and symptoms of parvovirus infection in children may include: Fever, Upset stomach, Headache, Runny nose.
Several days after the appearance of early symptoms, a distinctive bright red rash may appear on your child's face — usually on both cheeks. Eventually it may spread to the arms, trunk, thighs and buttocks, where the rash has a pink, lacy, slightly raised appearance. The rash may be itchy, especially on the soles of the feet.
Generally, the rash occurs near the end of the illness. It's possible to mistake the rash for other viral rashes or a medicine-related rash. The rash may come and go for up to three weeks, becoming more visible when your child is exposed to extreme temperatures or spends time in the sun.
Adults don't usually develop the slapped-cheek rash. Instead, the most noticeable symptom of parvovirus infection in adults is joint soreness, lasting days to weeks. Joints most commonly affected are the hands, wrists, knees and ankles.
Generally, you don't need to see a doctor for parvovirus infection. But if you or your child has an underlying condition that may increase the risk of complications, make an appointment with your doctor. These conditions include: Sickle cell anemia, Impaired immune system, Pregnancy.
The human parvovirus B19 causes parvovirus infection. This is different from the parvovirus seen in dogs and cats, so you can't get the infection from a pet or vice versa.
Human parvovirus infection is most common among elementary school-age children during outbreaks in the winter and spring months, but anyone can become ill with it anytime of the year. It spreads from person to person, just like a cold, often through breathing, coughing and saliva, so it can spread through close contact between people and hand-to-hand contact.
Parvovirus infection can also spread through blood. An infected pregnant woman can pass the virus to her baby.
The illness is contagious in the week before the rash appears. Once the rash appears, you or your child are no longer considered contagious and don't need to be isolated.
Parvovirus infection can cause serious complications for people with anemia. Anemia is a condition in which cells that carry oxygen to all the parts of your body (red blood cells) are used up faster than your bone marrow can replace them. Parvovirus infection in people with anemia may stop the production of red blood cells and cause an anemia crisis. People with sickle cell anemia are at particular risk.
Parvovirus can also cause anemia and related complications in: The unborn children of women infected with parvovirus during pregnancy, People who have weakened immune systems.
Parvovirus infection during pregnancy sometimes affects red blood cells in the fetus. Although uncommon, this may cause severe anemia that could lead to miscarriage or stillbirth. Fetal risk appears to be greatest during the first half of the pregnancy.
Parvovirus infection can also trigger severe anemia in people who have compromised immune systems, which may result from: HIV infection, Cancer treatments, Anti-rejection drugs used after organ transplants.
Pain is the first symptom of patellar tendinitis, usually between your kneecap and where the tendon attaches to your shinbone (tibia).
Initially, you may only feel pain in your knee as you begin physical activity or just after an intense workout. Over time, the pain worsens and starts to interfere with playing your sport. Eventually, the pain interferes with daily movements such as climbing stairs or rising from a chair.
For knee pain, try self-care measures first, such as icing the area and temporarily reducing or avoiding activities that trigger your symptoms.
Call your doctor if your pain: Continues or worsens, Interferes with your ability to perform routine daily activities, Is associated with swelling or redness about the joint.
Patellar tendinitis is a common overuse injury, caused by repeated stress on your patellar tendon. The stress results in tiny tears in the tendon, which your body attempts to repair.
But as the tears in the tendon multiply, they cause pain from inflammation and weakening of the tendon. When this tendon damage persists for more than a few weeks, it's called tendinopathy.
A combination of factors may contribute to the development of patellar tendinitis, including:
Physical activity. Running and jumping are most commonly associated with patellar tendinitis. Sudden increases in how hard or how often you engage in the activity also add stress to the tendon, as can changing your running shoes.
Tight leg muscles. Tight thigh muscles (quadriceps) and hamstrings, which run up the back of your thighs, can increase strain on your patellar tendon.
Muscular imbalance. If some muscles in your legs are much stronger than others, the stronger muscles could pull harder on your patellar tendon. This uneven pull could cause tendinitis.
Chronic illness. Some illnesses disrupt blood flow to the knee, which weakens the tendon. Examples include kidney failure, autoimmune diseases such as lupus or rheumatoid arthritis and metabolic diseases such as diabetes.
If you try to work through your pain, ignoring your body's warning signs, you could cause increasingly larger tears in the patellar tendon. Knee pain and reduced function can persist if you don't tend to the problem, and you may progress to the more serious patellar tendinopathy.
Patellofemoral pain syndrome usually causes a dull, aching pain in the front of your knee. This pain can be aggravated when you: Walk up or down stairs, Kneel or squat, Sit with a bent knee for long periods of time.
If the knee pain doesn't improve within a few days, consult your doctor.
Doctors aren't certain what causes patellofemoral pain syndrome, but it's been associated with:
Overuse. Running or jumping sports puts repetitive stress on your knee joint, which can cause irritation under the kneecap.
Muscle imbalances or weaknesses. Patellofemoral pain can occur when the muscles around your hip and knee don't keep your kneecap properly aligned. Inward movement of the knee during a squat has been found to be associated with patellofemoral pain.
Injury. Trauma to the kneecap, such as a dislocation or fracture, has been linked to patellofemoral pain syndrome.
Surgery. Knee surgery, particularly repair to the anterior cruciate ligament using your own patellar tendon as a graft, increases the risk of patellofemoral pain.
Factors that can increase your risk include:
Age. Patellofemoral pain syndrome typically affects adolescents and young adults. Knee problems in older populations are more commonly caused by arthritis.
Sex. Women are twice as likely as men are to develop patellofemoral pain. This may be because a woman's wider pelvis increases the angle at which the bones in the knee joint meet.
Certain sports. Participation in running and jumping sports can put extra stress on your knees, especially when you increase your training level.
Patent ductus arteriosus symptoms vary with the size of the defect and whether the baby is full term or premature. A small PDA might cause no signs or symptoms and go undetected for some time — even until adulthood. A large PDA can cause signs of heart failure soon after birth.
Your baby's doctor might first suspect a heart defect during a regular checkup after hearing a heart murmur while listening to your baby's heart through a stethoscope.
A large PDA found during infancy or childhood might cause: Poor eating, which leads to poor growth, Sweating with crying or eating, Persistent fast breathing or breathlessness, Easy tiring, Rapid heart rate.
Contact the doctor if your baby or older child: Tires easily when eating or playing, Isn't gaining weight, Becomes breathless when eating or crying, Always breathes rapidly or is short of breath.
Congenital heart defects arise from problems early in the heart's development — but there's often no clear cause. Genetic factors might play a role.
Before birth, a vascular connection (ductus arteriosus) between two major blood vessels leading from the heart — the aorta and pulmonary artery — is necessary for a baby's blood circulation. The ductus arteriosus diverts blood from a baby's lungs while they develop, and the baby receives oxygen from the mother's circulation.
After birth, the ductus arteriosus normally closes within two or three days. In premature infants, the connection often takes longer to close. If the connection remains open, it's referred to as a patent ductus arteriosus.
The abnormal opening causes too much blood to circulate to the baby's lungs and heart. Untreated, the blood pressure in the baby's lungs might increase (pulmonary hypertension) and the baby's heart might enlarge and weaken.
Risk factors for having a patent ductus arteriosus include:
Premature birth. Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) occurs more commonly in babies who are born too early than in babies who are born full term.
Family history and other genetic conditions. A family history of heart defects and other genetic conditions, such as Down syndrome, increase the risk of having a PDA.
Rubella infection during pregnancy. If you contract German measles (rubella) during pregnancy, your baby's risk of heart defects increases. The rubella virus crosses the placenta and spreads through the baby's circulatory system, damaging blood vessels and organs, including the heart.
Being born at a high altitude. Babies born above 10,000 feet (3,048 meters) have a greater risk of a PDA than babies born at lower altitudes.
Being female. PDA is twice as common in girls.
A small patent ductus arteriosus might not cause complications. Larger, untreated defects could cause:
High blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension). Too much blood circulating through the heart's main arteries through a patent ductus arteriosus can lead to pulmonary hypertension, which can cause permanent lung damage. A large patent ductus arteriosus can lead to Eisenmenger syndrome, an irreversible type of pulmonary hypertension.
Heart failure. A patent ductus arteriosus can eventually cause the heart to enlarge and weaken, leading to heart failure, a chronic condition in which the heart can't pump effectively.
Heart infection (endocarditis). People who have structural heart problems, such as a patent ductus arteriosus, are at a higher risk of an inflammation of the heart's inner lining (infectious endocarditis) than are people who have healthy hearts.
Most women who have a small patent ductus arteriosus can tolerate pregnancy without problems. However, having a larger defect or complications — such as heart failure, arrhythmias or pulmonary hypertension — can increase the risk of complications during pregnancy. If you have Eisenmenger syndrome, pregnancy should be avoided as it can be life-threatening.
If you have a heart defect, repaired or not, discuss family planning with your doctor. In some cases, preconception consultations with doctors who specialize in congenital cardiology, genetics and high-risk obstetric care are needed. Some heart medications can cause serious problems for a developing baby, and it might be necessary to stop or adjust the medications before you become pregnant.
Most people with a patent foramen ovale don't know they have it, because it's usually a hidden condition that doesn't create signs or symptoms.
It's unclear what causes the foramen ovale to stay open in some people, though genetics may play a role.
An overview of normal heart function in a child or adult is helpful in understanding the role of the foramen ovale before birth.
Your heart has four pumping chambers that circulate your blood:
The right atrium. The upper right chamber (right atrium) receives oxygen-poor blood from your body and pumps it into the right ventricle through the tricuspid valve.
The right ventricle. The lower right chamber (right ventricle) pumps the blood through a large vessel called the pulmonary artery and into the lungs, where the blood is resupplied with oxygen and carbon dioxide is removed from the blood. The blood is pumped through the pulmonary valve, which closes when the right ventricle relaxes between beats.
The left atrium. The upper left chamber (left atrium) receives the oxygen-rich blood from the lungs through the pulmonary veins and pumps it into the left ventricle through the mitral valve.
The left ventricle. The lower left chamber (left ventricle) pumps the oxygen-rich blood through a large vessel called the aorta and on to the rest of the body. The blood passes through the aortic valve, which also closes when the left ventricle relaxes.
Because a baby in the womb isn't breathing, the lungs aren't functioning yet. That means there's no need to pump blood to the lungs. At this stage, it's more efficient for blood to bypass the lungs and use a different route to circulate oxygen-rich blood from the mother to the baby's body.
The umbilical cord delivers oxygen-rich blood to the baby's right atrium. Most of this blood travels through the foramen ovale and into the left atrium. From there the blood goes to the left ventricle, which pumps it throughout the body. Blood also travels from the right atrium to the right ventricle, which also pumps blood to the body via another bypass system.
When a baby's lungs begin functioning, the circulation of blood through the heart changes. Now the oxygen-rich blood comes from the lungs and enters the left atrium. At this point, blood circulation follows the normal circulatory route.
The pressure of the blood pumping through the heart usually forces the flap opening of the foramen ovale closed. In most people, the opening fuses shut, usually sometime during infancy.
Generally, a patent foramen ovale doesn't cause complications. But some studies have found the disorder is more common in people with certain conditions, such as unexplained strokes and migraines with aura.
In most cases, there are other reasons for these neurologic conditions, and it's just a coincidence the person also has a patent foramen ovale. However, in some cases, small blood clots in the heart may move through a patent foramen ovale, travel to the brain and cause a stroke.
The possible link between a patent foramen ovale and a stroke or migraine is controversial, and research studies are ongoing.
In rare cases a patent foramen ovale can cause a significant amount of blood to bypass the lungs, resulting in low blood oxygen levels (hypoxemia).
In decompression illness, which can occur in scuba diving, an air blood clot can travel through a patent foramen ovale.
In some cases, other heart defects may be present in addition to a patent foramen ovale.
An allergic response to peanuts usually occurs within minutes after exposure. Peanut allergy signs and symptoms can include: Skin reactions, such as hives, redness or swelling, Itching or tingling in or around the mouth and throat, Digestive problems, such as diarrhea, stomach cramps, nausea or vomiting, Tightening of the throat, Shortness of breath or wheezing, Runny nose.
Peanut allergy is the most common cause of food-induced anaphylaxis, a medical emergency that requires treatment with an epinephrine (adrenaline) autoinjector (EpiPen, Auvi-Q, others) and a trip to the emergency room.
Anaphylaxis signs and symptoms can include: Constriction of airways, Swelling of the throat that makes it difficult to breathe, A severe drop in blood pressure (shock), Rapid pulse, Dizziness, lightheadedness or loss of consciousness.
Talk to your doctor if you have had any signs or symptoms of peanut allergy.
Seek emergency treatment if you have a severe reaction to peanuts, especially if you have any signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis. Call 911 or your local emergency number if you or someone else displays severe dizziness, severe trouble breathing or loss of consciousness.
Peanut allergy occurs when your immune system mistakenly identifies peanut proteins as something harmful. Direct or indirect contact with peanuts causes your immune system to release symptom-causing chemicals into your bloodstream.
Exposure to peanuts can occur in various ways:
Direct contact. The most common cause of peanut allergy is eating peanuts or peanut-containing foods. Sometimes direct skin contact with peanuts can trigger an allergic reaction.
Cross-contact. This is the unintended introduction of peanuts into a product. It's generally the result of a food being exposed to peanuts during processing or handling.
Inhalation. An allergic reaction may occur if you inhale dust or aerosols containing peanuts, from a source such as peanut flour or peanut oil cooking spray.
It isn't clear why some people develop allergies while others don't. However, people with certain risk factors have a greater chance of developing peanut allergy.
Peanut allergy risk factors include:
Age. Food allergies are most common in children, especially toddlers and infants. As you grow older, your digestive system matures, and your body is less likely to react to food that triggers allergies.
Past allergy to peanuts. Some children with peanut allergy outgrow it. However, even if you seem to have outgrown peanut allergy, it may recur.
Other allergies. If you're already allergic to one food, you may be at increased risk of becoming allergic to another. Likewise, having another type of allergy, such as hay fever, increases your risk of having a food allergy.
Family members with allergies. You're at increased risk of peanut allergy if other allergies, especially other types of food allergies, are common in your family.
Atopic dermatitis. Some people with the skin condition atopic dermatitis (eczema) also have a food allergy.
Complications of peanut allergy can include anaphylaxis. Children and adults who have a severe peanut allergy are especially at risk of having this life-threatening reaction.
The main symptom of pectus carinatum is a breastbone that sticks out. Sometimes the deformity isn't noticeable until after the adolescent growth spurt. Some people will also have shortness of breath, especially during exercise.
For many people with pectus excavatum, the only sign or symptom is a slight indentation in their chests. In some people, the depth of the indentation worsens in early adolescence and can continue to worsen into adulthood.
In severe cases of pectus excavatum, the breastbone may compress the lungs and heart. Signs and symptoms may include: Decreased exercise tolerance, Rapid heartbeat or heart palpitations, Recurrent respiratory infections, Wheezing or coughing, Chest pain, Heart murmur, Fatigue, Dizziness.
While the exact cause of pectus excavatum is unknown, it may be an inherited condition because it sometimes runs in families.
Pectus excavatum is more common in boys than in girls. It also occurs more often in people who also have: Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Osteogenesis imperfecta, Noonan syndrome, Turner syndrome.
Severe cases of pectus excavatum can compress the heart and lungs or push the heart over to one side. Even mild cases of pectus excavatum can result in self-image problems.
If the depth of the breastbone indentation is severe, it may reduce the amount of room the lungs have to expand. This compression can also squeeze the heart, pushing it into the left side of the chest and reducing its ability to pump efficiently. This can cause symptoms such as exercise intolerance, shortness of breath, rapid heart rate and chest pain.
Many people who have pectus excavatum will also tend to have a hunched-forward posture, with flared ribs and shoulder blades. Many are so self-conscious about their appearance that they avoid activities, such as swimming, that make the indentation in their chests more difficult to camouflage behind clothing.
Signs and symptoms of a brain tumor in children vary greatly and depend on the brain tumor type, size, location and rate of growth. Some signs and symptoms may not be easy to detect because they're similar to symptoms of other conditions.
Some of the more common symptoms of a brain tumor in children include: Headaches, which may become more frequent and more severe, Feeling of increased pressure in the head, Unexplained nausea or vomiting, Abrupt onset of vision problems, such double vision.
Other possible signs and symptoms, depending on the tumor location, include: A fuller soft spot (fontanel) on the skull in babies, Seizures, especially when there's no history of seizures, Abnormal eye movement, Slurred speech, Trouble swallowing, Loss of appetite; or in babies, difficulty feeding, Difficulty with balance, Trouble walking, Weakness or loss of sensation in an arm or a leg, Weakness or drooping on one side on the face, Confusion, irritability, Memory problems, Personality or behavior changes, Hearing problems.
Make an appointment with your child's doctor if your child has signs and symptoms that concern you.
In most cases, the exact cause of a pediatric brain tumor is not known.
Pediatric brain tumors typically are primary brain tumors — tumors that start in the brain or in tissues close to it. Primary brain tumors begin when normal cells have errors (mutations) in their DNA. These mutations allow cells to grow and divide at increased rates and to continue living when healthy cells would die. The result is a mass of abnormal cells, which forms a tumor.
Many different types of brain tumors — which may or may not be cancerous — can occur in children.
In most children with primary brain tumors, the cause of the tumor isn't clear. But certain types of brain tumors, such as medulloblastoma or ependymoma, are more common in children. Though uncommon, a family history of brain tumors or a family history of genetic syndromes may increase the risk of brain tumors in some children.
During sleep, signs and symptoms of pediatric sleep apnea might include: Snoring, Pauses in breathing, Restless sleep, Snorting, coughing or choking, Mouth breathing, Nighttime sweating, Bed-wetting, Sleep terrors.
Infants and young children with obstructive sleep apnea don't always snore. They might just have disturbed sleep.
During the day, children with sleep apnea might: Perform poorly in school, Have difficulty paying attention, Have learning problems, Have behavioral problems, Have poor weight gain, Be hyperactive.
Make an appointment with your child's doctor if your child consistently wakes up in the morning feeling tired and has behavioral problems.
Obesity is a common factor underlying obstructive sleep apnea in adults. But in children the most common condition leading to obstructive sleep apnea is enlarged tonsils and adenoids. However, obesity also plays a role in children. Other underlying factors can be craniofacial anomalies and neuromuscular disorders.
Besides obesity, other risk factors for pediatric sleep apnea include having: Down syndrome, Abnormalities in the skull or face, Cerebral palsy, Sickle cell disease, Neuromuscular disease, History of low birth weight, Family history of obstructive sleep apnea.
Some children who have thrombocytopenia never experience bleeding symptoms. For those who do have symptoms, they may include: Easy bruising, A sprinkling of small purplish spots on the skin (called petechiae or purpura), Nosebleeds, Bleeding from the gums, Prolonged bleeding from minor cuts.
Children who have mild cases of thrombocytopenia may have no symptoms at all.
Children can develop thrombocytopenia if the bone marrow doesn't make enough platelets, the body destroys too many platelets or the spleen retains too many platelets.
These problems can result from: Diseases affecting the immune system, Infections, Hereditary disorders, Exposure to certain medications or toxins, Cancers such as leukemia or lymphoma.
The signs and symptoms of pelvic inflammatory disease might be mild and difficult to recognize. Some women don't have any signs or symptoms. When signs and symptoms of PID are present, they most often include: Pain — ranging from mild to severe — in your lower abdomen and pelvis, Abnormal or heavy vaginal discharge that may have an unpleasant odor, Abnormal uterine bleeding, especially during or after intercourse, or between menstrual cycles, Pain during intercourse, Fever, sometimes with chills, Painful, frequent or difficult urination.
See your doctor or seek urgent medical care if you experience: Severe pain low in your abdomen, Nausea and vomiting, with an inability to keep anything down, Fever, with a temperature higher than 101 F (38.3 C), Foul vaginal discharge.
If you have signs and symptoms of PID that aren't severe, still see your doctor as soon as possible. Vaginal discharge with an odor, painful urination or bleeding between menstrual cycles can also be symptoms of a sexually transmitted infection (STI). If these signs and symptoms occur, stop having sex and see your doctor soon. Prompt treatment of an STI can help prevent PID.
Many types of bacteria can cause PID, but gonorrhea or chlamydia infections are the most common. These bacteria are usually acquired during unprotected sex.
Less commonly, bacteria can enter your reproductive tract anytime the normal barrier created by the cervix is disturbed. This can happen during menstruation and after childbirth, miscarriage or abortion. Rarely, bacteria can also enter the reproductive tract during the insertion of an intrauterine device (IUD) — a form of long-term birth control — or any medical procedure that involves inserting instruments into the uterus.
A number of factors might increase your risk of pelvic inflammatory disease, including: Being a sexually active woman younger than 25 years old, Having multiple sexual partners, Being in a sexual relationship with a person who has more than one sex partner, Having sex without a condom, Douching regularly, which upsets the balance of good versus harmful bacteria in the vagina and might mask symptoms, Having a history of pelvic inflammatory disease or a sexually transmitted infection.
There is a small increased risk of PID after the insertion of an intrauterine device (IUD). This risk is generally confined to the first three weeks after insertion.
Untreated pelvic inflammatory disease might cause scar tissue and pockets of infected fluid (abscesses) to develop in the reproductive tract. These can cause permanent damage to the reproductive organs.
Complications from this damage might include:
Ectopic pregnancy. PID is a major cause of tubal (ectopic) pregnancy. An ectopic pregnancy can occur when untreated PID has caused scar tissue to develop in the fallopian tubes. The scar tissue prevents the fertilized egg from making its way through the fallopian tube to implant in the uterus. Instead, the egg implants in the fallopian tube. Ectopic pregnancies can cause massive, life-threatening bleeding and require emergency medical attention.
Infertility. Damage to your reproductive organs may cause infertility — the inability to become pregnant. The more times you've had PID, the greater your risk of infertility. Delaying treatment for PID also dramatically increases your risk of infertility.
Chronic pelvic pain. Pelvic inflammatory disease can cause pelvic pain that might last for months or years. Scarring in your fallopian tubes and other pelvic organs can cause pain during intercourse and ovulation.
Tubo-ovarian abscess. PID might cause an abscess — a collection of pus — to form in your reproductive tract. Most commonly, abscesses affect the fallopian tubes and ovaries, but they can also develop in the uterus or in other pelvic organs. If an abscess is left untreated, you could develop a life-threatening infection.
Pemphigus causes blisters on your skin and mucous membranes. The blisters rupture easily, leaving open sores, which may ooze and become infected.
The signs and symptoms of two common types of pemphigus are as follows:
Pemphigus vulgaris. This type usually begins with blisters in your mouth and then on your skin or genital mucous membranes. The blisters typically are painful but don't itch. Blisters in your mouth or throat may make it hard to swallow and eat.
Pemphigus foliaceus. This type causes blisters on the chest, back and shoulders. The blisters tend to be more itchy than painful. Pemphigus foliaceus doesn't cause mouth blisters.
Pemphigus is distinct from bullous pemphigoid, which is a blistering skin condition that affects older adults and may cause death.
See your doctor if you have blisters inside your mouth or on your skin that don't heal.
Pemphigus is an autoimmune disorder. Normally, your immune system produces antibodies to fight off harmful invaders, such viruses and bacteria. But in pemphigus, the body produces antibodies that damage cells of your skin and mucous membranes.
Pemphigus isn't contagious. In most cases, it's unknown what triggers the disease.
Rarely, pemphigus is triggered by the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, penicillamine and other drugs.
Your risk of pemphigus increases if you're middle-aged or older. The condition tends to be more common in people of Middle Eastern or Jewish descent.
Possible complications of pemphigus include: Infection of your skin, Infection that spreads to your bloodstream (sepsis), Malnutrition, because painful mouth sores make it difficult to eat, Medication side effects, such as high blood pressure and infection, Death, if certain types of pemphigus are left untreated.
Signs and symptoms of penicillin allergy often occur within an hour after taking the drug. Less commonly, reactions can occur hours, days or weeks later.
Penicillin allergy signs and symptoms may include: Skin rash, Hives, Itching, Fever, Swelling, Shortness of breath, Wheezing, Runny nose, Itchy, watery eyes, Anaphylaxis.
Anaphylaxis is a rare, life-threatening allergic reaction that causes the widespread dysfunction of body systems. Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include: Tightening of the airways and throat, causing trouble breathing, Nausea or abdominal cramps, Vomiting or diarrhea, Dizziness or lightheadedness, Weak, rapid pulse, Drop in blood pressure, Seizures, Loss of consciousness.
Less-common penicillin allergy reactions occur days or weeks after exposure to the drug and may persist for some time after you stop taking it. These conditions include: Serum sickness, which may cause fever, joint pain, rash, swelling and nausea, Drug-induced anemia, a reduction in red blood cells, which can cause fatigue, irregular heartbeats, shortness of breath, and other signs and symptoms, Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), which results in rash, high white blood cell counts, general swelling, swollen lymph nodes and recurrence of dormant hepatitis infection, Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis, which involves severe blistering and peeling of the skin, Inflammation in the kidneys (nephritis), which can cause fever, blood in the urine, general swelling, confusion, and other signs and symptoms.
You may experience side effects of penicillin — as happens with other medications — that are not an allergic reaction to the drug. Depending on the type of penicillin, common side effects may include mild nausea or diarrhea, headache, or vaginal itching. Signs or symptoms of an infection for which you are being treated — or unrelated symptoms — also may be mistaken as an allergic drug reaction.
See your doctor as soon as possible if you experience signs or symptoms of penicillin allergy. It's important to understand and discuss what is an allergic reaction, what is a typical side effect and what you can tolerate in taking a medication.
Call 911 or emergency medical help if you experience signs of a severe reaction or suspected anaphylaxis after taking penicillin.
Penicillin allergy occurs when your immune system becomes hypersensitive to the drug — mistakenly reacting to the drug as a harmful substance, as if it were a viral or bacterial infection.
Before the immune system can become sensitive to penicillin, you have to be exposed to the medication at least once. If and when your immune system misidentifies penicillin as a harmful substance, it develops an antibody to the drug.
The next time you take the drug, these specific antibodies flag it and direct immune system attacks on the substance. Chemicals released by this activity cause the signs and symptoms associated with an allergic reaction.
Previous exposure to penicillin may not be obvious. Some evidence suggests that trace amounts of it in the food supply may be sufficient for a person's immune system to create an antibody to it.
Penicillins belong to a class of antibacterial drugs called beta-lactam antibiotics. Although the mechanisms of the drugs vary, generally they fight infections by attacking the walls of bacterial cells. In addition to penicillins, other beta-lactams more commonly associated with allergic reactions are a group called cephalosporins.
If you've had an allergic reaction to one type of penicillin, you may be — but are not necessarily — allergic to other types of penicillin or to some cephalosporins.
Penicillins include: Amoxicillin, Ampicillin, Dicloxacillin, Nafcillin, Oxacillin, Penicillin G, Penicillin V, Piperacillin, Ticarcillin.
Cephalosporins include: Cefaclor, Cefadroxil, Cefazolin, Cefdinir, Cefepime (Maxipine), Cefotetan, Cefprozil, Cefuroxime, Cephalexin (Keflex).
While anyone can have an allergic reaction to penicillin, a few factors can increase your risk. These include: A history of other allergies, such as food allergy or hay fever, Allergic reaction to another drug, A family history of drug allergy, Increased exposure to penicillin, because of high doses, repetitive use or prolonged use, Certain illnesses commonly associated with allergic drug reactions, such as infection with HIV or the Epstein-Barr virus.
Burning stomach pain, Feeling of fullness, bloating or belching, Intolerance to fatty foods, Heartburn, Nausea.
The most common peptic ulcer symptom is burning stomach pain. Stomach acid makes the pain worse, as does having an empty stomach. The pain can often be relieved by eating certain foods that buffer stomach acid or by taking an acid-reducing medication, but then it may come back. The pain may be worse between meals and at night.
Many people with peptic ulcers don't even have symptoms.
Less often, ulcers may cause severe signs or symptoms such as: Vomiting or vomiting blood — which may appear red or black, Dark blood in stools, or stools that are black or tarry, Trouble breathing, Feeling faint, Nausea or vomiting, Unexplained weight loss, Appetite changes.
See your doctor if you have the severe signs or symptoms listed above. Also see your doctor if over-the-counter antacids and acid blockers relieve your pain but the pain returns.
Peptic ulcers occur when acid in the digestive tract eats away at the inner surface of the stomach or small intestine. The acid can create a painful open sore that may bleed.
Your digestive tract is coated with a mucous layer that normally protects against acid. But if the amount of acid is increased or the amount of mucus is decreased, you could develop an ulcer.
Common causes include:
A bacterium. Helicobacter pylori bacteria commonly live in the mucous layer that covers and protects tissues that line the stomach and small intestine. Often, the H. pylori bacterium causes no problems, but it can cause inflammation of the stomach's inner layer, producing an ulcer.
It's not clear how H. pylori infection spreads. It may be transmitted from person to person by close contact, such as kissing. People may also contract H. pylori through food and water.
Regular use of certain pain relievers. Taking aspirin, as well as certain over-the-counter and prescription pain medications called nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) , can irritate or inflame the lining of your stomach and small intestine. These medications include ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen sodium (Aleve, Anaprox DS, others), ketoprofen and others. They do not include acetaminophen (Tylenol, others).
Other medications. Taking certain other medications along with NSAIDs, such as steroids, anticoagulants, low-dose aspirin, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), alendronate (Fosamax) and risedronate (Actonel), can greatly increase the chance of developing ulcers.
In addition to having risks related to taking NSAIDs, you may have an increased risk of peptic ulcers if you:
Smoke. Smoking may increase the risk of peptic ulcers in people who are infected with H. pylori.
Drink alcohol. Alcohol can irritate and erode the mucous lining of your stomach, and it increases the amount of stomach acid that's produced.
Have untreated stress.
Eat spicy foods.
Alone, these factors do not cause ulcers, but they can make ulcers worse and more difficult to heal.
Left untreated, peptic ulcers can result in:
Internal bleeding. Bleeding can occur as slow blood loss that leads to anemia or as severe blood loss that may require hospitalization or a blood transfusion. Severe blood loss may cause black or bloody vomit or black or bloody stools.
A hole (perforation) in your stomach wall. Peptic ulcers can eat a hole through (perforate) the wall of your stomach or small intestine, putting you at risk of serious infection of your abdominal cavity (peritonitis).
Obstruction. Peptic ulcers can block passage of food through the digestive tract, causing you to become full easily, to vomit and to lose weight either through swelling from inflammation or through scarring.
Gastric cancer. Studies have shown that people infected with H. pylori have an increased risk of gastric cancer.
You can have significant pericardial effusion without signs or symptoms, particularly if the fluid has increased slowly.
If pericardial effusion symptoms do occur, they might include: Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing (dyspnea), Discomfort when breathing while lying down (orthopnea), Chest pain, usually behind the breastbone or on the left side of the chest, Chest fullness, Swelling in the legs or abdomen.
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you feel chest pain that lasts more than a few minutes, if your breathing is difficult or painful, or if you have an unexplained fainting spell.
See your doctor if you have shortness of breath.
Pericardial effusion can result from inflammation of the pericardium (pericarditis) in response to illness or injury. Pericardial effusion can also occur when the flow of pericardial fluid is blocked or when blood collects within the pericardium, such as from a chest trauma.
Sometimes the cause can't be determined (idiopathic pericarditis).
Causes of pericardial effusion include: Inflammation of the pericardium following heart surgery or a heart attack, Autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus, Spread of cancer (metastasis), particularly lung cancer, breast cancer, melanoma, leukemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma or Hodgkin's disease, Cancer of the pericardium or heart, Radiation therapy for cancer if the heart was within the field of radiation, Chemotherapy treatments for cancer, including doxorubicin (Doxil) and cyclophosphamide, Waste products in the blood due to kidney failure (uremia), Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), Viral, bacterial, fungal or parasitic infections, Trauma or puncture wound near the heart after open-heart surgery, Certain prescription drugs, including hydralazine, a medication for high blood pressure; isoniazid, a tuberculosis drug; and phenytoin (Dilantin, Phenytek, others), a medication for epileptic seizures.
Depending on how quickly pericardial effusion develops, the pericardium can stretch somewhat to accommodate the excess fluid. However, too much fluid causes the pericardium to put pressure on the heart, which prevents the chambers from filling completely.
This condition, called tamponade (tam-pon-AYD), results in poor blood flow and a lack of oxygen to the body. Tamponade is life-threatening and requires emergency care.
Chest pain is the most common symptom of pericarditis. It usually feels sharp or stabbing. However, some people have dull, achy or pressure-like chest pain.
The pain usually occurs behind the breastbone or in the left side of your chest.
It may spread to your left shoulder and neck.
It often gets worse when you cough, lie down or take a deep breath.
Sitting up and leaning forward makes you feel better.
Other signs and symptoms of pericarditis may include: Abdominal or leg swelling, Cough, Fatigue or general feeling of weakness or being sick, Low-grade fever, Pounding or racing heartbeat (heart palpitations), Shortness of breath when lying down.
The specific symptoms you have depend on the type of pericarditis you have. Pericarditis is grouped into different categories, according to the pattern of symptoms and how long symptoms last.
Acute pericarditis begins suddenly but doesn't last longer than three weeks. Future episodes can occur. It may be difficult to tell the difference between acute pericarditis and pain due to a heart attack.
Recurrent pericarditis occurs about four to six weeks after an episode of acute pericarditis with no symptoms in between.
Incessant pericarditis lasts about four to six weeks but less than three months. The symptoms are continuous.
Chronic constrictive pericarditis usually develops slowly and lasts longer than three months.
Seek immediate medical care if you develop new symptoms of chest pain.
Many of the symptoms of pericarditis are similar to those of other heart and lung conditions. The sooner you are evaluated, the sooner you can receive proper diagnosis and treatment. For example, although the cause of acute chest pain may be pericarditis, the original cause could have been a heart attack or a blood clot of the lungs (pulmonary embolus).
The cause of pericarditis is often hard to determine. Sometimes, doctors can't find a cause (idiopathic pericarditis).
Pericarditis causes can include: Heart attack or heart surgery, which may trigger pericarditis or delayed pericarditis (Dressler's syndrome, also called postmyocardial infarction syndrome or postcardiac injury syndrome), Infection, Systemic inflammatory disorders, including lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, Trauma, such as injury to your heart or chest as a result of a motor vehicle or other accident, Other health disorders, including kidney failure, AIDS, tuberculosis and cancer.
Early diagnosis and treatment of pericarditis usually reduces the risk of the long-term complications. Complications of pericarditis include:
Pericardial effusion. Pericarditis is usually associated with fluid around the heart, which can lead to more serious complications.
Chronic constrictive pericarditis. Some people with long-term (chronic) pericarditis develop permanent thickening and scarring of the pericardium, which prevents the heart from filling and emptying properly. This unusual complication often leads to severe swelling of the legs and abdomen and shortness of breath.
Cardiac tamponade. This life-threatening condition can develop when too much fluid collects in the pericardium. Excess fluid puts pressure on the heart and doesn't allow it to fill properly. Less blood leaves the heart, causing a dramatic drop in blood pressure. Cardiac tamponade requires emergency treatment.
Throughout the menopausal transition, some subtle — and some not-so-subtle — changes in your body may take place. You might experience:
Irregular periods. As ovulation becomes more unpredictable, the length of time between periods may be longer or shorter, your flow may be light to heavy, and you may skip some periods. If you have a persistent change of seven days or more in the length of your menstrual cycle, you may be in early perimenopause. If you have a space of 60 days or more between periods, you're likely in late perimenopause.
Hot flashes and sleep problems. Hot flashes are common during perimenopause. The intensity, length and frequency vary. Sleep problems are often due to hot flashes or night sweats, but sometimes sleep becomes unpredictable even without them.
Mood changes. Mood swings, irritability or increased risk of depression may happen during perimenopause. The cause of these symptoms may be sleep disruption associated with hot flashes. Mood changes may also be caused by factors not related to the hormonal changes of perimenopause.
Vaginal and bladder problems. When estrogen levels diminish, your vaginal tissues may lose lubrication and elasticity, making intercourse painful. Low estrogen may also leave you more vulnerable to urinary or vaginal infections. Loss of tissue tone may contribute to urinary incontinence.
Decreasing fertility. As ovulation becomes irregular, your ability to conceive decreases. However, as long as you're having periods, pregnancy is still possible. If you wish to avoid pregnancy, use birth control until you've had no periods for 12 months.
Changes in sexual function. During perimenopause, sexual arousal and desire may change. But if you had satisfactory sexual intimacy before menopause, this will likely continue through perimenopause and beyond.
Loss of bone. With declining estrogen levels, you start to lose bone more quickly than you replace it, increasing your risk of osteoporosis — a disease that causes fragile bones.
Changing cholesterol levels. Declining estrogen levels may lead to unfavorable changes in your blood cholesterol levels, including an increase in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol — the "bad" cholesterol — which contributes to an increased risk of heart disease. At the same time, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol — the "good" cholesterol — decreases in many women as they age, which also increases the risk of heart disease.
Some women seek medical attention for their perimenopausal symptoms. But others either tolerate the changes or simply don't experience symptoms severe enough to need attention. Because symptoms may be subtle and come on gradually, you may not realize at first that they're all connected to the same thing — rising and falling levels of estrogen and progesterone, another key female hormone.
If you have symptoms that interfere with your life or well-being, such as hot flashes, mood swings or changes in sexual function that concern you, see your doctor.
As you go through the menopausal transition, your body's production of estrogen and progesterone rises and falls. Many of the changes you experience during perimenopause are a result of decreasing estrogen.
Menopause is a normal phase in life. But it may occur earlier in some women than in others. Although not always conclusive, some evidence suggests that certain factors may make it more likely that you start perimenopause at an earlier age, including:
Smoking. The onset of menopause occurs one to two years earlier in women who smoke than in women who don't smoke.
Family history. Women with a family history of early menopause may experience early menopause themselves.
Cancer treatment. Treatment for cancer with chemotherapy or pelvic radiation therapy has been linked to early menopause.
Hysterectomy. A hysterectomy that removes your uterus, but not your ovaries, usually doesn't cause menopause. Although you no longer have periods, your ovaries still produce estrogen. But such surgery may cause menopause to occur earlier than average. Also, if you have one ovary removed, the remaining ovary might stop working sooner than expected.
Irregular periods are a hallmark of perimenopause. Most of the time this is normal and nothing to be concerned about. However, see your doctor if: Bleeding is extremely heavy — you're changing tampons or pads every hour or two for two or more hours, Bleeding lasts longer than seven days, Bleeding occurs between periods, Periods regularly occur less than 21 days apart.
Signs such as these may mean there's a problem with your reproductive system that requires diagnosis and treatment.
Healthy gums are firm and pale pink and fit snugly around teeth. Signs and symptoms of periodontitis can include: Swollen or puffy gums, Bright red, dusky red or purplish gums, Gums that feel tender when touched, Gums that bleed easily, Pink-tinged toothbrush after brushing, Spitting out blood when brushing or flossing your teeth, Bad breath, Pus between your teeth and gums, Loose teeth or loss of teeth, Painful chewing, New spaces developing between your teeth, Gums that pull away from your teeth (recede), making your teeth look longer than normal, A change in the way your teeth fit together when you bite.
Follow your dentist's recommended schedule for regular checkups. If you notice any symptoms of periodontitis, make an appointment with your dentist as soon as possible. The sooner you seek care, the better your chances of reversing damage from periodontitis.
In most cases, the development of periodontitis starts with plaque — a sticky film composed mainly of bacteria. If left untreated, here's how plaque can eventually advance to periodontitis:
Plaque forms on your teeth when starches and sugars in food interact with bacteria normally found in your mouth. Brushing your teeth twice a day and flossing once a day removes plaque, but plaque re-forms quickly.
Plaque can harden under your gumline into tartar (calculus) if it stays on your teeth. Tartar is more difficult to remove and it's filled with bacteria. The longer plaque and tartar remain on your teeth, the more damage they can do. You can't get rid of tartar by brushing and flossing — you need a professional dental cleaning to remove it.
Plaque can cause gingivitis, the mildest form of gum disease. Gingivitis is irritation and inflammation of the part of your gum tissue around the base of your teeth (gingiva). Gingivitis can be reversed with professional treatment and good home oral care.
Ongoing gum inflammation can cause periodontitis, eventually causing pockets to develop between your gums and teeth that fill with plaque, tartar and bacteria. In time, these pockets become deeper, filling with more bacteria. If not treated, these deep infections cause a loss of tissue and bone, and ultimately you may lose one or more teeth. Also, ongoing chronic inflammation can put a strain on your immune system.
Factors that can increase your risk of periodontitis include: Gingivitis, Poor oral health habits, Smoking or chewing tobacco, Hormonal changes, such as those related to pregnancy or menopause, Recreational drug use, such as smoking marijuana or vaping, Obesity, Inadequate nutrition, including vitamin C deficiency, Genetics, Certain medications that cause dry mouth or gum changes, Conditions that cause decreased immunity, such as leukemia, HIV/AIDS and cancer treatment, Certain diseases, such as diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease.
Periodontitis can cause tooth loss. The bacteria responsible for periodontitis can enter your bloodstream through gum tissue, possibly affecting other parts of your body. For example, periodontitis is linked with respiratory disease, rheumatoid arthritis, coronary artery disease and problems controlling blood sugar in diabetes.
While many people with peripheral artery disease have mild or no symptoms, some people have leg pain when walking (claudication).
Claudication symptoms include muscle pain or cramping in your legs or arms that's triggered by activity, such as walking, but disappears after a few minutes of rest. The location of the pain depends on the location of the clogged or narrowed artery. Calf pain is the most common location.
The severity of claudication varies widely, from mild discomfort to debilitating pain. Severe claudication can make it hard for you to walk or do other types of physical activity.
Peripheral artery disease signs and symptoms include: Painful cramping in one or both of your hips, thighs or calf muscles after certain activities, such as walking or climbing stairs (claudication), Leg numbness or weakness, Coldness in your lower leg or foot, especially when compared with the other side, Sores on your toes, feet or legs that won't heal, A change in the color of your legs, Hair loss or slower hair growth on your feet and legs, Slower growth of your toenails, Shiny skin on your legs, No pulse or a weak pulse in your legs or feet, Erectile dysfunction in men.
If peripheral artery disease progresses, pain may even occur when you're at rest or when you're lying down (ischemic rest pain). It may be intense enough to disrupt sleep. Hanging your legs over the edge of your bed or walking around your room may temporarily relieve the pain.
If you have leg pain, numbness or other symptoms, don't dismiss them as a normal part of aging. Call your doctor and make an appointment.
Even if you don't have symptoms of peripheral artery disease, you may need to be screened if you are: Over age 65, Over age 50 and have a history of diabetes or smoking, Under age 50, but have diabetes and other peripheral artery disease risk factors, such as obesity or high blood pressure.
Peripheral artery disease is often caused by atherosclerosis. In atherosclerosis, fatty deposits (plaques) build up on your artery walls and reduce blood flow.
Although discussions of atherosclerosis usually focus on the heart, the disease can and usually does affect arteries throughout your body. When it occurs in the arteries supplying blood to your limbs, it causes peripheral artery disease.
Less commonly, the cause of peripheral artery disease may be blood vessel inflammation, injury to your limbs, unusual anatomy of your ligaments or muscles, or radiation exposure.
Factors that increase your risk of developing peripheral artery disease include: Smoking, Diabetes, Obesity (a body mass index over 30), High blood pressure, High cholesterol, Increasing age, especially after reaching 50 years of age, A family history of peripheral artery disease, heart disease or stroke, High levels of homocysteine, a protein component that helps build and maintain tissue.
People who smoke or have diabetes have the greatest risk of developing peripheral artery disease due to reduced blood flow.
If your peripheral artery disease is caused by a buildup of plaques in your blood vessels (atherosclerosis), you're also at risk of developing:
Critical limb ischemia. This condition begins as open sores that don't heal, an injury, or an infection of your feet or legs. Critical limb ischemia occurs when such injuries or infections progress and cause tissue death (gangrene), sometimes requiring amputation of the affected limb.
Stroke and heart attack. The atherosclerosis that causes the signs and symptoms of peripheral artery disease isn't limited to your legs. Fat deposits also build up in arteries supplying blood to your heart and brain.
With a peripheral nerve injury, you may experience symptoms that range from mild to seriously limiting your daily activities. Your symptoms often depend on which nerve fibers are affected:
Motor nerves. These nerves regulate all the muscles under your conscious control, such as walking, talking, and holding objects. Damage to these nerves is typically associated with muscle weakness, painful cramps and uncontrollable muscle twitching.
Sensory nerves. Because these nerves relay information about touch, temperature and pain, you may experience a variety of symptoms. These include numbness or tingling in your hands or feet. You may have trouble sensing pain or changes in temperature, walking, keeping your balance with your eyes closed or fastening buttons.
Autonomic (aw-tu-NOM-ik) nerves. This group of nerves regulates activities that are not controlled consciously, such as breathing, heart and thyroid function, and digesting food. Symptoms may include excessive sweating, changes in blood pressure, the inability to tolerate heat and gastrointestinal symptoms.
You may experience a range of symptoms because many peripheral nerve injuries affect more than one type of nerve fibers.
If you experience weakness, tingling, numbness or a total loss of feeling in a limb, see your doctor to determine the cause. It's important to treat peripheral nerve injuries early.
Peripheral nerves can be damaged in several ways:
Injury from an accident, a fall or sports can stretch, compress, crush or cut nerves.
Medical conditions, such as diabetes, Guillain-Barre syndrome and carpal tunnel syndrome.
Autoimmune diseases including lupus, rheumatoid arthritis and Sjogren's syndrome.
Other causes include narrowing of the arteries, hormonal imbalances and tumors.
Every nerve in your peripheral system has a specific function, so symptoms depend on the type of nerves affected. Nerves are classified into: Sensory nerves that receive sensation, such as temperature, pain, vibration or touch, from the skin, Motor nerves that control muscle movement, Autonomic nerves that control functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, digestion and bladder.
Signs and symptoms of peripheral neuropathy might include: Gradual onset of numbness, prickling or tingling in your feet or hands, which can spread upward into your legs and arms, Sharp, jabbing, throbbing or burning pain, Extreme sensitivity to touch, Pain during activities that shouldn't cause pain, such as pain in your feet when putting weight on them or when they're under a blanket, Lack of coordination and falling, Muscle weakness, Feeling as if you're wearing gloves or socks when you're not, Paralysis if motor nerves are affected.
If autonomic nerves are affected, signs and symptoms might include: Heat intolerance, Excessive sweating or not being able to sweat, Bowel, bladder or digestive problems, Changes in blood pressure, causing dizziness or lightheadedness.
Peripheral neuropathy can affect one nerve (mononeuropathy), two or more nerves in different areas (multiple mononeuropathy) or many nerves (polyneuropathy). Carpal tunnel syndrome is an example of mononeuropathy. Most people with peripheral neuropathy have polyneuropathy.
Seek medical care right away if you notice unusual tingling, weakness or pain in your hands or feet. Early diagnosis and treatment offer the best chance for controlling your symptoms and preventing further damage to your peripheral nerves.
Not a single disease, peripheral neuropathy is nerve damage caused by a number of conditions. Health conditions that can cause peripheral neuropathy include:
Autoimmune diseases. These include Sjogren's syndrome, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy and vasculitis.
Diabetes. More than half the people with diabetes develop some type of neuropathy.
Infections. These include certain viral or bacterial infections, including Lyme disease, shingles, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis B and C, leprosy, diphtheria, and HIV.
Inherited disorders. Disorders such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease are hereditary types of neuropathy.
Tumors. Growths, cancerous (malignant) and noncancerous (benign), can develop on the nerves or press nerves. Also, polyneuropathy can arise as a result of some cancers related to the body's immune response. These are a form of a degenerative disorder called paraneoplastic syndrome.
Bone marrow disorders. These include an abnormal protein in the blood (monoclonal gammopathies), a form of bone cancer (myeloma), lymphoma and the rare disease amyloidosis.
Other diseases. These include kidney disease, liver disease, connective tissue disorders and an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism).
Other causes of neuropathies include:
Alcoholism. Poor dietary choices made by people with alcoholism can lead to vitamin deficiencies.
Exposure to poisons. Toxic substances include industrial chemicals and heavy metals such as lead and mercury.
Medications. Certain medications, especially those used to treat cancer (chemotherapy), can cause peripheral neuropathy.
Trauma or pressure on the nerve. Traumas, such as from motor vehicle accidents, falls or sports injuries, can sever or damage peripheral nerves. Nerve pressure can result from having a cast or using crutches or repeating a motion such as typing many times.
Vitamin deficiencies. B vitamins — including B-1, B-6 and B-12 — vitamin E and niacin are crucial to nerve health.
In a number of cases, no cause can be identified (idiopathic).
Peripheral neuropathy risk factors include: Diabetes, especially if your sugar levels are poorly controlled, Alcohol abuse, Vitamin deficiencies, particularly B vitamins, Infections, such as Lyme disease, shingles, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis B and C, and HIV, Autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus, in which your immune system attacks your own tissues, Kidney, liver or thyroid disorders, Exposure to toxins, Repetitive motion, such as those performed for certain jobs, Family history of neuropathy.
Complications of peripheral neuropathy can include:
Burns and skin trauma. You might not feel temperature changes or pain on parts of your body that are numb.
Infection. Your feet and other areas lacking sensation can become injured without your knowing. Check these areas regularly and treat minor injuries before they become infected, especially if you have diabetes.
Falls. Weakness and loss of sensation may be associated with lack of balance and falling.
Signs and symptoms of peritonitis include: Abdominal pain or tenderness, Bloating or a feeling of fullness in your abdomen, Fever, Nausea and vomiting, Loss of appetite, Diarrhea, Low urine output, Thirst, Inability to pass stool or gas, Fatigue, Confusion.
If you're receiving peritoneal dialysis, peritonitis symptoms may also include: Cloudy dialysis fluid, White flecks, strands or clumps (fibrin) in the dialysis fluid.
Peritonitis can be life-threatening if it's not treated promptly. Contact your doctor immediately if you have severe pain or tenderness of your abdomen, abdominal bloating, or a feeling of fullness associated with: Fever, Nausea and vomiting, Low urine output, Thirst, Inability to pass stool or gas.
If you're receiving peritoneal dialysis, contact your health care provider immediately if your dialysis fluid: Is cloudy or has an unusual color, Contains white flecks, Contains strands or clumps (fibrin), Has an unusual odor, especially if the area around your tube (catheter) is red or painful..
Peritonitis may result from a burst appendix or trauma-related abdominal injury.
Seek immediate medical attention if you develop abdominal pain so severe that you're unable to sit still or find a comfortable position.
Call 911 or seek emergency medical assistance if you have severe abdominal pain following an accident or injury.
Infection of the peritoneum can happen for a variety of reasons. In most cases, the cause is a rupture (perforation) within the abdominal wall. Though it's rare, the condition can develop without an abdominal rupture.
Common causes of ruptures that lead to peritonitis include:
Medical procedures, such as peritoneal dialysis. Peritoneal dialysis uses tubes (catheters) to remove waste products from your blood when your kidneys can no longer adequately do so. An infection may occur during peritoneal dialysis due to unclean surroundings, poor hygiene or contaminated equipment. Peritonitis may also develop as a complication of gastrointestinal surgery, the use of feeding tubes, or a procedure to withdraw fluid from your abdomen, and rarely as a complication of a colonoscopy or endoscopy.
A ruptured appendix, stomach ulcer or perforated colon. Any of these conditions can allow bacteria to get into the peritoneum through a hole in your gastrointestinal tract.
Pancreatitis. Inflammation of your pancreas (pancreatitis) complicated by infection may lead to peritonitis if the bacteria spreads outside the pancreas.
Diverticulitis. Infection of small, bulging pouches in your digestive tract (diverticulosis) may cause peritonitis if one of the pouches ruptures, spilling intestinal waste into your abdominal cavity.
Trauma. Injury or trauma may cause peritonitis by allowing bacteria or chemicals from other parts of your body to enter the peritoneum.
Peritonitis that develops without an abdominal rupture (spontaneous bacterial peritonitis) is usually a complication of liver disease, such as cirrhosis. Advanced cirrhosis causes a large amount of fluid buildup in your abdominal cavity. That fluid buildup is susceptible to bacterial infection.
Factors that increase your risk of peritonitis include:
Peritoneal dialysis. Peritonitis can occur in people undergoing peritoneal dialysis therapy.
Other medical conditions. The following medical conditions, among others, increase your risk of developing peritonitis: liver cirrhosis, appendicitis, Crohn's disease, stomach ulcers, diverticulitis and pancreatitis.
History of peritonitis. Once you've had peritonitis, your risk of developing it again may be higher than it is for someone who has never had peritonitis.
Left untreated, peritonitis can extend beyond your peritoneum, where it may cause:
An infection throughout your body (sepsis). Sepsis is a rapidly progressing, life-threatening condition that can cause shock, organ failure and death.
Persistent depressive disorder symptoms usually come and go over a period of years, and their intensity can change over time. But typically symptoms don't disappear for more than two months at a time. In addition, major depression episodes may occur before or during persistent depressive disorder — this is sometimes called double depression.
Symptoms of persistent depressive disorder can cause significant impairment and may include: Loss of interest in daily activities, Sadness, emptiness or feeling down, Hopelessness, Tiredness and lack of energy, Low self-esteem, self-criticism or feeling incapable, Trouble concentrating and trouble making decisions, Irritability or excessive anger, Decreased activity, effectiveness and productivity, Avoidance of social activities, Feelings of guilt and worries over the past, Poor appetite or overeating, Sleep problems.
In children, symptoms of persistent depressive disorder may include depressed mood and irritability.
Because these feelings have gone on for such a long time, you may think they'll always be part of your life. But if you have any symptoms of persistent depressive disorder, seek medical help.
Talk to your primary care doctor about your symptoms. Or seek help directly from a mental health professional. If you're reluctant to see a mental health professional, reach out to someone else who may be able to help guide you to treatment, whether it's a friend or loved one, a teacher, a faith leader, or someone else you trust.
If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
The exact cause of persistent depressive disorder isn't known. As with major depression, it may involve more than one cause, such as:
Biological differences. People with persistent depressive disorder may have physical changes in their brains. The significance of these changes is still uncertain, but they may eventually help pinpoint causes.
Brain chemistry. Neurotransmitters are naturally occurring brain chemicals that likely play a role in depression. Recent research indicates that changes in the function and effect of these neurotransmitters and how they interact with neurocircuits involved in maintaining mood stability may play a significant role in depression and its treatment.
Inherited traits. Persistent depressive disorder appears to be more common in people whose blood relatives also have the condition. Researchers are trying to find genes that may be involved in causing depression.
Life events. As with major depression, traumatic events such as the loss of a loved one, financial problems or a high level of stress can trigger persistent depressive disorder in some people
Persistent depressive disorder often begins early — in childhood, the teen years or young adult life — and is chronic. Certain factors appear to increase the risk of developing or triggering persistent depressive disorder, including: Having a first-degree relative with major depressive disorder or other depressive disorders, Traumatic or stressful life events, such as the loss of a loved one or financial problems, Personality traits that include negativity, such as low self-esteem and being too dependent, self-critical or pessimistic, History of other mental health disorders, such as a personality disorder.
Conditions that may be linked with persistent depressive disorder include: Reduced quality of life, Major depression, anxiety disorders and other mood disorders, Substance abuse, Relationship difficulties and family conflicts, School and work problems and decreased productivity, Chronic pain and general medical illnesses, Suicidal thoughts or behavior, Personality disorders or other mental health disorders.
Persistent post-concussive symptoms include: Headaches, Dizziness, Fatigue, Irritability, Anxiety, Insomnia, Loss of concentration and memory, Ringing in the ears, Blurry vision, Noise and light sensitivity, Rarely, decreases in taste and smell.
Post-concussion headaches can vary and may feel like tension-type headaches or migraines. Most often, they are tension-type headaches. These may be associated with a neck injury that happened at the same time as the head injury.
See a doctor if you experience a head injury severe enough to cause confusion or amnesia — even if you never lost consciousness.
If a concussion occurs while you're playing a sport, don't go back in the game. Seek medical attention so that you don't risk worsening your injury.
Some experts believe persistent post-concussive symptoms are caused by structural damage to the brain or disruption of the messaging system within the nerves, caused by the impact that caused the concussion.
Others believe persistent post-concussive symptoms are related to psychological factors. The most common symptoms — headache, dizziness and sleep problems — are similar to those often experienced by people diagnosed with depression, anxiety or post-traumatic stress disorder.
In many cases, both physical damage of brain trauma and emotional reactions to these effects play a role in the development of symptoms.
However, some research shows that certain factors are more common in people who develop persistent post-concussive symptoms compared with those who don't. These factors include a history of depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, significant life stressors, a poor social support system and lack of coping skills.
More research is still needed to better understand how and why persistent post-concussive symptoms happen after some injuries and not others.
Risk factors for developing persistent post-concussive symptoms include:
Age. Studies have found increasing age to be a risk factor for persistent post-concussive symptoms.
Sex. Women are more likely to be diagnosed with persistent post-concussive symptoms, but this may be because women are generally more likely to seek medical care.
Types of personality disorders are grouped into three clusters, based on similar characteristics and symptoms. Many people with one personality disorder also have signs and symptoms of at least one additional personality disorder. It's not necessary to exhibit all the signs and symptoms listed for a disorder to be diagnosed.
Cluster A personality disorders are characterized by odd, eccentric thinking or behavior. They include paranoid personality disorder, schizoid personality disorder and schizotypal personality disorder. Pervasive distrust and suspicion of others and their motives, Unjustified belief that others are trying to harm or deceive you, Unjustified suspicion of the loyalty or trustworthiness of others, Hesitancy to confide in others due to unreasonable fear that others will use the information against you, Perception of innocent remarks or nonthreatening situations as personal insults or attacks, Angry or hostile reaction to perceived slights or insults, Tendency to hold grudges, Unjustified, recurrent suspicion that spouse or sexual partner is unfaithful.
Lack of interest in social or personal relationships, preferring to be alone, Limited range of emotional expression, Inability to take pleasure in most activities, Inability to pick up normal social cues, Appearance of being cold or indifferent to others, Little or no interest in having sex with another person.
Peculiar dress, thinking, beliefs, speech or behavior, Odd perceptual experiences, such as hearing a voice whisper your name, Flat emotions or inappropriate emotional responses, Social anxiety and a lack of or discomfort with close relationships, Indifferent, inappropriate or suspicious response to others, "Magical thinking" — believing you can influence people and events with your thoughts, Belief that certain casual incidents or events have hidden messages meant only for you.
Cluster B personality disorders are characterized by dramatic, overly emotional or unpredictable thinking or behavior. They include antisocial personality disorder, borderline personality disorder, histrionic personality disorder and narcissistic personality disorder. Disregard for others' needs or feelings, Persistent lying, stealing, using aliases, conning others, Recurring problems with the law, Repeated violation of the rights of others, Aggressive, often violent behavior, Disregard for the safety of self or others, Impulsive behavior, Consistently irresponsible, Lack of remorse for behavior.
Impulsive and risky behavior, such as having unsafe sex, gambling or binge eating, Unstable or fragile self-image, Unstable and intense relationships, Up and down moods, often as a reaction to interpersonal stress, Suicidal behavior or threats of self-injury, Intense fear of being alone or abandoned, Ongoing feelings of emptiness, Frequent, intense displays of anger, Stress-related paranoia that comes and goes.
Constantly seeking attention, Excessively emotional, dramatic or sexually provocative to gain attention, Speaks dramatically with strong opinions, but few facts or details to back them up, Easily influenced by others, Shallow, rapidly changing emotions, Excessive concern with physical appearance, Thinks relationships with others are closer than they really are.
Belief that you're special and more important than others, Fantasies about power, success and attractiveness, Failure to recognize others' needs and feelings, Exaggeration of achievements or talents, Expectation of constant praise and admiration, Arrogance, Unreasonable expectations of favors and advantages, often taking advantage of others, Envy of others or belief that others envy you.
Cluster C personality disorders are characterized by anxious, fearful thinking or behavior. They include avoidant personality disorder, dependent personality disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. Too sensitive to criticism or rejection, Feeling inadequate, inferior or unattractive, Avoidance of work activities that require interpersonal contact, Socially inhibited, timid and isolated, avoiding new activities or meeting strangers, Extreme shyness in social situations and personal relationships, Fear of disapproval, embarrassment or ridicule.
Excessive dependence on others and feeling the need to be taken care of, Submissive or clingy behavior toward others, Fear of having to provide self-care or fend for yourself if left alone, Lack of self-confidence, requiring excessive advice and reassurance from others to make even small decisions, Difficulty starting or doing projects on your own due to lack of self-confidence, Difficulty disagreeing with others, fearing disapproval, Tolerance of poor or abusive treatment, even when other options are available, Urgent need to start a new relationship when a close one has ended.
Preoccupation with details, orderliness and rules, Extreme perfectionism, resulting in dysfunction and distress when perfection is not achieved, such as feeling unable to finish a project because you don't meet your own strict standards, Desire to be in control of people, tasks and situations, and inability to delegate tasks, Neglect of friends and enjoyable activities because of excessive commitment to work or a project, Inability to discard broken or worthless objects, Rigid and stubborn, Inflexible about morality, ethics or values, Tight, miserly control over budgeting and spending money.
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is not the same as obsessive-compulsive disorder, a type of anxiety disorder.
If you have any signs or symptoms of a personality disorder, see your doctor or other primary care professional or a mental health professional. Untreated, personality disorders can cause significant problems in your life that may get worse without treatment.
Personality is the combination of thoughts, emotions and behaviors that makes you unique. It's the way you view, understand and relate to the outside world, as well as how you see yourself. Personality forms during childhood, shaped through an interaction of:
Your genes. Certain personality traits may be passed on to you by your parents through inherited genes. These traits are sometimes called your temperament.
Your environment. This involves the surroundings you grew up in, events that occurred, and relationships with family members and others.
Personality disorders are thought to be caused by a combination of these genetic and environmental influences. Your genes may make you vulnerable to developing a personality disorder, and a life situation may trigger the actual development.
Although the precise cause of personality disorders is not known, certain factors seem to increase the risk of developing or triggering personality disorders, including: Family history of personality disorders or other mental illness, Abusive, unstable or chaotic family life during childhood, Being diagnosed with childhood conduct disorder, Variations in brain chemistry and structure.
Personality disorders can significantly disrupt the lives of both the affected person and those who care about that person. Personality disorders may cause problems with relationships, work or school, and can lead to social isolation or alcohol or drug abuse.
Pet allergy signs and symptoms caused by inflammation of nasal passages include: Sneezing, Runny nose, Itchy, red or watery eyes, Nasal congestion, Itchy nose, roof of mouth or throat, Postnasal drip, Cough, Facial pressure and pain, Frequent awakening, Swollen, blue-colored skin under your eyes, In a child, frequent upward rubbing of the nose.
If your pet allergy contributes to asthma, you may also experience: Difficulty breathing, Chest tightness or pain, Audible whistling or wheezing sound when exhaling, Trouble sleeping caused by shortness of breath, coughing or wheezing.
Some people with pet allergy may also experience skin symptoms, a pattern known as allergic dermatitis. This type of dermatitis is an immune system reaction that causes skin inflammation. Direct contact with an allergy-causing pet may trigger allergic dermatitis, causing signs and symptoms, such as: Raised, red patches of skin (hives), Eczema, Itchy skin.
Some signs and symptoms of pet allergy, such as a runny nose or sneezing, are similar to those of the common cold. Sometimes it's difficult to know whether you have a cold or an allergy. If symptoms persist for more than two weeks, you might have an allergy.
If your signs and symptoms are severe — with nasal passages feeling completely blocked and difficulty sleeping or wheezing — call your doctor. Seek emergency care if wheezing or shortness of breath rapidly worsens or if you are short of breath with minimal activity.
Allergies occur when your immune system reacts to a foreign substance such as pollen, mold or pet dander.
Your immune system produces proteins known as antibodies. These antibodies protect you from unwanted invaders that could make you sick or cause an infection. When you have allergies, your immune system makes antibodies that identify your particular allergen as something harmful, even though it isn't.
When you inhale the allergen or come into contact with it, your immune system responds and produces an inflammatory response in your nasal passages or lungs. Prolonged or regular exposure to the allergen can cause the ongoing (chronic) airway inflammation associated with asthma.
Allergens from cats and dogs are found in skin cells the animals shed (dander), as well as in their saliva, urine and sweat and on their fur. Dander is a particular problem because it is very small and can remain airborne for long periods of time with the slightest bit of air circulation. It also collects easily in upholstered furniture and sticks to your clothes.
Pet saliva can stick to carpets, bedding, furniture and clothing. Dried saliva can become airborne.
So-called hypoallergenic cats and dogs may shed less fur than shedding types, but no breed is truly hypoallergenic.
Rodent pets include mice, gerbils, hamsters and guinea pigs. Allergens from rodents are usually present in hair, dander, saliva and urine. Dust from litter or sawdust in the bottom of cages may contribute to airborne allergens from rodents.
Rabbit allergens are present in dander, hair and saliva.
Pet allergy is rarely caused by animals that don't have fur, such as fish and reptiles.
Pet allergies are common. However, you're more likely to develop a pet allergy if allergies or asthma runs in your family.
Being exposed to pets at an early age may help you avoid pet allergies. Some studies have found that children who live with a dog in the first year of life may have better resistance to upper respiratory infections during childhood than kids who don't have a dog at that age.
Ongoing (chronic) inflammation of tissues in the nasal passages caused by pet allergy can obstruct the hollow cavities connected to your nasal passages (sinuses). These obstructions may make you more likely to develop bacterial infections of the sinuses, such as sinusitis.
People with asthma and pet allergy often have difficulty managing asthma symptoms. They may be at risk of asthma attacks that require immediate medical treatment or emergency care.
Peyronie's disease signs and symptoms might appear suddenly or develop gradually. The most common signs and symptoms include:
Scar tissue. The scar tissue associated with Peyronie's disease — called plaque but different from plaque that can build up in blood vessels — can be felt under the skin of the penis as flat lumps or a band of hard tissue.
A significant bend to the penis. Your penis might curve upward or downward or bend to one side.
Erection problems. Peyronie's disease might cause problems getting or maintaining an erection (erectile dysfunction). But, often men report erectile dysfunction before the beginning of Peyronie's disease symptoms.
Shortening of the penis. Your penis might become shorter as a result of Peyronie's disease.
Pain. You might have penile pain, with or without an erection.
Other penile deformity. In some men with Peyronie's disease, the erect penis might have narrowing, indentations or even an hourglass-like appearance, with a tight, narrow band around the shaft.
The curvature and penile shortening associated with Peyronie's disease might gradually worsen. At some point, however, the condition typically stabilizes after three to 12 months or so.
Pain during erections usually improves within one to two years, but the scar tissue, penile shortening and curvature often remain. In some men, both the curvature and pain associated with Peyronie's disease improve without treatment.
See your doctor as soon as possible after you notice signs or symptoms of Peyronie's disease. Early treatment gives you the best chance to improve the condition — or prevent it from getting worse. If you've had the condition for some time, you may wish to see a doctor if the pain, curvature, length or other deformities bother you or your partner.
The cause of Peyronie's disease isn't completely understood, but a number of factors appear to be involved.
It's thought Peyronie's disease generally results from repeated injury to the penis. For example, the penis might be damaged during sex, athletic activity or as the result of an accident. However, most often, no specific trauma to the penis is recalled.
During the healing process after injury to the penis, scar tissue forms in a disorganized manner. This can lead to a nodule you can feel or development of curvature.
Each side of the penis contains a spongelike tube (corpus cavernosum) that contains many tiny blood vessels. Each of the corpora cavernosa is encased in a sheath of elastic tissue called the tunica albuginea (TOO-nih-kuh al-BYOO-JIN-e-uh), which stretches during an erection.
When you become sexually aroused, blood flow to these chambers increases. As the chambers fill with blood, the penis expands, straightens and stiffens into an erection.
In Peyronie's disease, when the penis becomes erect, the region with the scar tissue doesn't stretch, and the penis bends or becomes disfigured and possibly painful.
In some men, Peyronie's disease comes on gradually and doesn't seem to be related to an injury. Researchers are investigating whether Peyronie's disease might be linked to an inherited trait or certain health conditions.
Minor injury to the penis doesn't always lead to Peyronie's disease. However, various factors can contribute to poor wound healing and scar tissue buildup that might play a role in Peyronie's disease. These include:
Heredity. If a family member has Peyronie's disease, you have an increased risk of the condition.
Connective tissue disorders. Men who have certain connective tissue disorders appear to have an increased risk of developing Peyronie's disease. For example, a number of men who have Peyronie's disease also have a cordlike thickening across the palm that causes the fingers to pull inward (Dupuytren's contracture).
Age. Peyronie's disease can occur in men of any age, but the prevalence of the condition increases with age, especially for men in their 50s and 60s. Curvature in younger men is less often due to Peyronie's disease and is more commonly called congenital penile curvature. A small amount of curvature in younger men is normal and not concerning.
Other factors — including certain health conditions, smoking and some types of prostate surgery — might be linked to Peyronie's disease.
Complications of Peyronie's disease might include: Inability to have sexual intercourse, Difficulty achieving or maintaining an erection (erectile dysfunction), Anxiety or stress about sexual abilities or the appearance of your penis, Stress on your relationship with your sexual partner, Difficulty fathering a child, because intercourse is difficult or impossible, Reduced penis length, Penile pain.
Newborns with PKU initially don't have any symptoms. However, without treatment, babies usually develop signs of PKU within a few months.
PKU signs and symptoms can be mild or severe and may include: A musty odor in the breath, skin or urine, caused by too much phenylalanine in the body, Neurological problems that may include seizures, Skin rashes (eczema), Fair skin and blue eyes, because phenylalanine can't transform into melanin — the pigment responsible for hair and skin tone, Abnormally small head (microcephaly), Hyperactivity, Intellectual disability, Delayed development, Behavioral, emotional and social problems, Psychiatric disorders.
The severity of PKU depends on the type.
Classic PKU. The most severe form of the disorder is called classic PKU. The enzyme needed to convert phenylalanine is missing or severely reduced, resulting in high levels of phenylalanine and severe brain damage.
Less severe forms of PKU. In mild or moderate forms, the enzyme retains some function, so phenylalanine levels are not as high, resulting in a smaller risk of significant brain damage.
But most children with the disorder still require a special PKU diet to prevent intellectual disability and other complications.
Women who have PKU and become pregnant are at risk of another form of the condition called maternal PKU. If women don't follow the special PKU diet before and during pregnancy, blood phenylalanine levels can become high and harm the developing fetus or cause a miscarriage.
Even women with less severe forms of PKU may place their unborn children at risk by not following the PKU diet.
Babies born to mothers with high phenylalanine levels don't often inherit PKU. But they can have serious consequences if the level of phenylalanine is high in the mother's blood during pregnancy. Complications at birth may include: Low birth weight, Delayed development, Facial abnormalities, Abnormally small head, Heart defects and other heart problems, Intellectual disability, Behavioral problems.
Seek medical advice in these situations:
Newborns. If routine newborn screening tests show that your baby may have PKU, your child's doctor will want to start dietary treatment right away to prevent long-term problems.
Women of childbearing years. It's especially important for women with a history of PKU to see a doctor and maintain the PKU diet before becoming pregnant and during pregnancy to reduce the risk of high blood phenylalanine levels harming their unborn babies.
Adults. People with PKU continue to receive care across the life span. Adults with PKU who have stopped the PKU diet in their teens may benefit from a visit with their doctors. Returning to the diet may improve mental functioning and behavior and slow damage to the central nervous system that can result from high phenylalanine levels.
A defective gene (genetic mutation) causes PKU, which can be mild, moderate or severe. In a person with PKU, this defective gene causes a lack of or deficiency of the enzyme that's needed to process phenylalanine, an amino acid.
A dangerous buildup of phenylalanine can develop when a person with PKU eats protein-rich foods, such as milk, cheese, nuts or meat, and even grains such as bread and pasta, or eats aspartame, an artificial sweetener. This buildup of phenylalanine results in damage to nerve cells in the brain.
For a child to inherit PKU, both the mother and father must have and pass on the defective gene. This pattern of inheritance is called autosomal recessive.
It's possible for a parent to be a carrier — to have the defective gene that causes PKU, but not have the disease. If only one parent has the defective gene, there's no risk of passing PKU to a child, but it's possible for the child to be a carrier.
Most often, PKU is passed to children by two parents who are carriers of the disorder, but don't know it.
Risk factors for inheriting PKU include:
Having both parents with a defective gene that causes PKU. Two parents must pass along a copy of the defective gene for their child to develop the condition.
Being of certain ethnic descent. The gene defect that causes PKU varies by ethnic groups and it's less common in African-Americans than in other ethnic groups.
Untreated PKU can lead to complications in infants, children and adults with the disorder. When mothers with PKU have high blood phenylalanine levels during pregnancy, fetal birth defects or miscarriage can occur.
Untreated PKU can lead to: Irreversible brain damage and marked intellectual disability beginning within the first few months of life, Neurological problems such as seizures and tremors, Behavioral, emotional and social problems in older children and adults, Major health and developmental problems.
Signs and symptoms of pheochromocytomas often include: High blood pressure, Headache, Heavy sweating, Rapid heartbeat, Tremors, Paleness in the face, Shortness of breath, Panic attack-type symptoms.
Less common signs or symptoms may include: Anxiety or sense of doom, Constipation, Weight loss.
The symptoms listed above may be constant, or they may occur, or get stronger, occasionally. Certain activities or conditions can make symptoms worse, such as: Physical exertion, Anxiety or stress, Changes in body position, Labor and delivery, Surgery and anesthesia.
Foods high in tyramine, a substance that affects blood pressure, also can make symptoms worse. Tyramine is common in foods that are fermented, aged, pickled, cured, overripe or spoiled. These foods include: Some cheeses, Some beers and wines, Chocolate, Dried or smoked meats.
Certain medications that can make symptoms worse include: Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), such as phenelzine (Nardil), tranylcypromine (Parnate) and isocarboxazid (Marplan), Stimulants, such as amphetamines or cocaine.
Although high blood pressure is a primary sign of a pheochromocytoma, most people who have high blood pressure don't have an adrenal tumor. Talk to your doctor if any of the following factors are applicable to you: Difficulty controlling high blood pressure with current treatment, Episodic worsening of high blood pressure, A family history of pheochromocytoma, A family history of a related genetic disorder: multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2 (MEN 2); von Hippel-Lindau disease; familial paraganglioma or neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1).
Researchers don't know exactly what causes a pheochromocytoma. The tumor develops in specialized cells, called chromaffin cells, located in the center of an adrenal gland. These cells release certain hormones, primarily adrenaline (epinephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinephrine), that help control many body functions, such as heart rate, blood pressure and blood sugar.
Adrenaline and noradrenaline trigger your body's fight-or-flight response to a perceived threat. The hormones cause your blood pressure to increase and your heart to beat faster. They prepare other body systems that enable you to react quickly. A pheochromocytoma causes more of these hormones to be released and causes them to be released when you're not in a threatening situation.
While most of the chromaffin cells are located in the adrenal glands, small clusters of these cells are also in the heart, head, neck, bladder, back wall of the abdomen and along the spine. Chromaffin cell tumors, called paragangliomas, may result in the same effects on the body.
People who have certain rare inherited disorders have an increased risk of pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma. Tumors associated with these disorders are more likely to be cancerous. These genetic conditions include:
Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2 (MEN 2) is a disorder that results in tumors in more than one part of the body's hormone-producing (endocrine) system. Other tumors associated with this condition can appear on the thyroid, parathyroid, lips, tongue and gastrointestinal tract.
Von Hippel-Lindau disease can result in tumors at multiple sites, including the central nervous system, endocrine system, pancreas and kidneys.
Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) results in multiple tumors in the skin (neurofibromas), pigmented skin spots and tumors of the optic nerve.
Hereditary paraganglioma syndromes are inherited disorders that result in either pheochromocytomas or paragangliomas.
High blood pressure can damage multiple organs, particularly tissues of the cardiovascular system, brain and kidneys. This damage can cause a number of critical conditions, including: Heart disease, Stroke, Kidney failure, Problems with the nerves of the eye.
Rarely, a pheochromocytoma is cancerous (malignant), and the cancerous cells spread to other parts of the body. Cancerous cells from a pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma most often travel to the lymph system, bones, liver or lungs.
When it's infected, a pilonidal cyst becomes a swollen mass (abscess). Signs and symptoms of an infected pilonidal cyst include: Pain, Reddening of the skin, Drainage of pus or blood from an opening in the skin, Foul smell from draining pus.
If you notice any signs or symptoms of a pilonidal cyst, see your doctor. He or she can diagnose the condition by examining the lesion.
The exact cause of pilonidal cysts isn't clear. But most pilonidal cysts appear to be caused by loose hairs that penetrate the skin. Friction and pressure — skin rubbing against skin, tight clothing, bicycling, long periods of sitting or similar factors — force the hair down into skin. Responding to the hair as a foreign substance, the body creates a cyst around the hair.
This explanation accounts for rare cases of pilonidal cysts that occur in parts of the body other than near the tailbone. For example, barbers, dog groomers and sheep shearers have developed pilonidal cysts in the skin between fingers.
Certain factors can make you more susceptible to developing pilonidal cysts, such as: Male sex, Younger age (pilonidal cysts are most common in people in their 20s), Obesity, Inactive lifestyle, Occupation requiring prolonged sitting, Excess body hair, Stiff or coarse hair.
If a chronically infected pilonidal cyst isn't treated properly, you may be at slightly increased risk of developing a type of skin cancer called squamous cell carcinoma.
Pinched nerve signs and symptoms include: Numbness or decreased sensation in the area supplied by the nerve, Sharp, aching or burning pain, which may radiate outward, Tingling, pins and needles sensations (paresthesia), Muscle weakness in the affected area, Frequent feeling that a foot or hand has "fallen asleep".
The problems related to a pinched nerve may be worse when you're sleeping.
See your doctor if the signs and symptoms of a pinched nerve last for several days and don't respond to self-care measures, such as rest and over-the-counter pain relievers.
A pinched nerve occurs when too much pressure (compression) is applied to a nerve by surrounding tissues.
In some cases, this tissue might be bone or cartilage, such as in the case of a herniated spinal disk that compresses a nerve root. In other cases, muscle or tendons may cause the condition.
In the case of carpal tunnel syndrome, a variety of tissues may be responsible for compression of the carpal tunnel's median nerve, including swollen tendon sheaths within the tunnel, enlarged bone that narrows the tunnel, or a thickened and degenerated ligament.
A number of conditions may cause tissue to compress a nerve or nerves, including: Injury, Rheumatoid or wrist arthritis, Stress from repetitive work, Hobbies or sports activities, Obesity.
If a nerve is pinched for only a short time, there's usually no permanent damage. Once the pressure is relieved, nerve function returns to normal. However, if the pressure continues, chronic pain and permanent nerve damage can occur.
The following factors may increase your risk of experiencing a pinched nerve:
Sex. Women are more likely to develop carpal tunnel syndrome, possibly due to having smaller carpal tunnels.
Bone spurs. Trauma or a condition that causes bone thickening, such as osteoarthritis, can cause bone spurs. Bone spurs can stiffen the spine as well as narrow the space where your nerves travel, pinching nerves.
Rheumatoid arthritis. Inflammation caused by rheumatoid arthritis can compress nerves, especially in your joints.
Thyroid disease. People with thyroid disease are at higher risk of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Other risk factors include:
Diabetes. People with diabetes are at higher risk of nerve compression.
Overuse. Jobs or hobbies that require repetitive hand, wrist or shoulder movements, such as assembly line work, increase your likelihood of a pinched nerve.
Obesity. Excess weight can add pressure to nerves.
Pregnancy. Water and weight gain associated with pregnancy can swell nerve pathways, compressing your nerves.
Prolonged bed rest. Long periods of lying down can increase the risk of nerve compression.
The most common pink eye symptoms include: Redness in one or both eyes, Itchiness in one or both eyes, A gritty feeling in one or both eyes, A discharge in one or both eyes that forms a crust during the night that may prevent your eye or eyes from opening in the morning, Tearing.
There are serious eye conditions that can cause eye redness. These conditions may cause eye pain, a feeling that something is stuck in your eye (foreign body sensation), blurred vision and light sensitivity. If you experience these symptoms, seek urgent care.
People who wear contact lenses need to stop wearing their contacts as soon as pink eye symptoms begin. If your symptoms don't start to get better within 12 to 24 hours, make an appointment with your eye doctor to make sure you don't have a more serious eye infection related to contact lens use.
Causes of pink eye include: Viruses, Bacteria, Allergies, A chemical splash in the eye, A foreign object in the eye, In newborns, a blocked tear duct.
Most cases of pink eye are typically caused by adenovirus but can also be caused by herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, and various other viruses, including the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Both viral and bacterial conjunctivitis can occur along with colds or symptoms of a respiratory infection, such as a sore throat. Wearing contact lenses that aren't cleaned properly or aren't your own can cause bacterial conjunctivitis.
Both types are very contagious. They are spread through direct or indirect contact with the liquid that drains from the eye of someone who's infected. One or both eyes may be affected.
Allergic conjunctivitis affects both eyes and is a response to an allergy-causing substance such as pollen. In response to allergens, your body produces an antibody called immunoglobulin E (IgE). This antibody triggers special cells called mast cells in the mucous lining of your eyes and airways to release inflammatory substances, including histamines. Your body's release of histamine can produce a number of allergy signs and symptoms, including red or pink eyes.
If you have allergic conjunctivitis, you may experience intense itching, tearing and inflammation of the eyes — as well as sneezing and watery nasal discharge. Most allergic conjunctivitis can be controlled with allergy eyedrops.
Irritation from a chemical splash or foreign object in your eye is also associated with conjunctivitis. Sometimes flushing and cleaning the eye to rid it of the chemical or object causes redness and irritation. Signs and symptoms, which may include watery eyes and a mucous discharge, usually clear up on their own within about a day.
If initial flushing doesn't resolve the symptoms, or if the chemical is a caustic one such as lye, you need to be seen by your doctor or eye specialist as soon as possible. A chemical splash into the eye can cause permanent eye damage. Persistent symptoms could also indicate that you still have the foreign body in your eye — or possibly a scratch over the cornea or the covering of the eyeball (sclera).
Risk factors for pink eye include: Exposure to something for which you have an allergy (allergic conjunctivitis), Exposure to someone infected with the viral or bacterial form of conjunctivitis, Using contact lenses, especially extended-wear lenses.
In both children and adults, pink eye can cause inflammation in the cornea that can affect vision. Prompt evaluation and treatment by your doctor for eye pain, a feeling that something is stuck in your eye (foreign body sensation), blurred vision or light sensitivity can reduce the risk of complications.
Symptoms of pinworm infection may include: Itching of the anal or vaginal area, Insomnia, irritability, teeth grinding and restlessness, Occasional stomach pain and nausea.
Pinworms often cause no symptoms.
Consult your doctor if you have severe anal itching, especially at night.
Accidentally swallowing or breathing in pinworm eggs causes a pinworm infection. The tiny (microscopic) eggs can be carried to your mouth by contaminated food, drink or your fingers. Once swallowed, the eggs hatch in the intestines and mature into adult worms within a few weeks.
Female pinworms move to the anal area to lay their eggs, which often results in anal itching. When you scratch the itchy area, the eggs cling to your fingers and get under your fingernails. The eggs then get transferred to other surfaces, such as toys, bedding or toilet seats. The eggs can also be transferred from contaminated fingers to food, liquids, clothes or other people.
Pinworm eggs can survive for two to three weeks on surfaces.
Risk factors for pinworm infection include:
Being young. Pinworm infections are most likely to occur in children ages 5 to 10. The tiny (microscopic) eggs are easily spread to family members, caregivers, or other children at school or child care centers. Pinworm infections are uncommon in children younger than age 2.
Living in crowded spaces. People who live in institutions are at higher risk of developing pinworm infections.
Typical pinworm infections don't cause serious problems. In rare circumstances, heavy infestations can cause infection of female genitals.
The parasite can travel from the anal area up the vagina to the uterus, fallopian tubes and around the pelvic organs. This can cause problems such as inflammation of the vagina (vaginitis) and inflammation of the inner lining of the uterus (endometritis).
Although rare, other complications of a pinworm infection may include: Urinary tract infections, Weight loss, Infection of part of the abdomen (peritoneal cavity).
Not all pituitary tumors cause symptoms. Pituitary tumors that make hormones (functioning) can cause a variety of signs and symptoms depending on the hormone they produce. The signs and symptoms of pituitary tumors that don't make hormones (nonfunctioning) are related to their growth and the pressure they put on other structures.
Large pituitary tumors — those measuring about 1 centimeter (slightly less than a half-inch) or larger — are known as macroadenomas. Smaller tumors are called microadenomas. Because of the size of macroadenomas, they can put pressure on the normal pituitary gland and nearby structures.
Signs and symptoms of pressure from a pituitary tumor may include: Headache, Vision loss, particularly loss of peripheral vision.
Functioning pituitary tumors cause an overproduction of hormones. Different types of functioning tumors in your pituitary gland cause specific signs and symptoms and sometimes a combination of them.
Large tumors could cause hormonal deficiencies. Signs and symptoms include: Nausea and vomiting, Weakness, Feeling cold, Less frequent or no menstrual periods, Sexual dysfunction, Increased amount of urine, Unintended weight loss or gain.
ACTH tumors produce the hormone adrenocorticotropin, which stimulates your adrenal glands to make the hormone cortisol. Cushing's syndrome results from your adrenal glands producing too much cortisol. Possible signs and symptoms of Cushing's syndrome include: Fat accumulation around your midsection and upper back, Exaggerated facial roundness, Thinning of the arms and legs with muscle weakness, High blood pressure, High blood sugar, Acne, Bone weakening, Bruising, Stretch marks, Anxiety, irritability or depression.
These tumors produce excess growth hormone (acromegaly), which can cause: Coarsened facial features, Enlarged hands and feet, Excess sweating, High blood sugar, Heart problems, Joint pain, Misaligned teeth, Increased body hair.
Children and adolescents might grow too fast or too tall.
Overproduction of prolactin from a pituitary tumor (prolactinoma) can cause a decrease in normal levels of sex hormones — estrogen in women and testosterone in men. Excessive prolactin in the blood affects men and women differently.
In women, prolactinoma might cause: Irregular menstrual periods, Lack of menstrual periods, Milky discharge from the breasts.
In men, a prolactin-producing tumor may cause male hypogonadism. Signs and symptoms can include: Erectile dysfunction, Lowered sperm count, Loss of sex drive, Breast growth.
When a pituitary tumor overproduces thyroid-stimulating hormone, your thyroid gland makes too much of the hormone thyroxine. This is a rare cause of hyperthyroidism or overactive thyroid disease. Hyperthyroidism can accelerate your body's metabolism, causing: Weight loss, Rapid or irregular heartbeat, Nervousness or irritability, Frequent bowel movements, Excessive sweating.
If you develop signs and symptoms that might be associated with a pituitary tumor, see your doctor. Pituitary tumors often can be treated to return your hormone levels to normal and alleviate your signs and symptoms.
If you know that multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1 (MEN 1) runs in your family, talk to your doctor about periodic tests that may help detect a pituitary tumor early.
The cause of uncontrolled cell growth in the pituitary gland, which creates a tumor, remains unknown.
The pituitary gland is a small, bean-shaped gland situated at the base of your brain, somewhat behind your nose and between your ears. Despite its small size, the gland influences nearly every part of your body. The hormones it produces help regulate important functions, such as growth, blood pressure and reproduction.
A small percentage of pituitary tumor cases run in families, but most have no apparent hereditary factor. Still, scientists suspect that genetic alterations play an important role in how pituitary tumors develop.
People with a family history of certain hereditary conditions, such as multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1 (MEN 1), have an increased risk of pituitary tumors. In MEN I, multiple tumors occur in various glands of the endocrine system. Genetic testing is available for this disorder.
Pituitary tumors usually don't grow or spread extensively. However, they can affect your health, possibly causing:
Vision loss. A pituitary tumor can put pressure on the optic nerves.
Permanent hormone deficiency. The presence of a pituitary tumor or the removal of one may permanently alter your hormone supply, which may need to be replaced with hormone medications.
A rare but potentially serious complication of a pituitary tumor is pituitary apoplexy, when sudden bleeding into the tumor occurs. It feels like the most severe headache you've ever had. Pituitary apoplexy requires emergency treatment, usually with corticosteroids and possibly surgery.
Pityriasis rosea typically begins with a large, slightly raised, scaly patch — called the herald patch — on your back, chest or abdomen. Before the herald patch appears, some people experience headache, fatigue, fever or sore throat.
A few days to a few weeks after the herald patch appears, you may notice smaller scaly spots across your back, chest or abdomen that resemble a pine-tree pattern. The rash can cause itching, which is occasionally severe.
See your doctor if you develop a persistent rash.
The exact cause of pityriasis rosea is unclear. Some evidence indicates the rash may be triggered by a viral infection, particularly by certain strains of the herpes virus. But it's not related to the herpes virus that causes cold sores. Pityriasis rosea isn't believed to be contagious.
Complications of pityriasis rosea aren't likely. If they do occur, they may include: Severe itching, On dark skin, lasting brown spots after the rash has healed.
Placenta accreta often causes no signs or symptoms during pregnancy — although vaginal bleeding during the third trimester might occur.
Occasionally, placenta accreta is detected during a routine ultrasound.
Placenta accreta is thought to be related to abnormalities in the lining of the uterus, typically due to scarring after a C-section or other uterine surgery. Sometimes, however, placenta accreta occurs without a history of uterine surgery.
Many factors can increase the risk of placenta accreta, including:
Previous uterine surgery. The risk of placenta accreta increases with the number of C-sections or other uterine surgeries you've had.
Placenta position. If the placenta partially or totally covers your cervix (placenta previa) or sits in the lower portion of your uterus, you're at increased risk of placenta accreta.
Maternal age. Placenta accreta is more common in women older than 35.
Previous childbirth. The risk of placenta accreta increases as your number of pregnancies increases.
Placenta accreta can cause:
Heavy vaginal bleeding. Placenta accreta poses a major risk of severe vaginal bleeding (hemorrhage) after delivery. The bleeding can cause a life-threatening condition that prevents your blood from clotting normally (disseminated intravascular coagulopathy), as well as lung failure (adult respiratory distress syndrome) and kidney failure. A blood transfusion will likely be necessary.
Premature birth. Placenta accreta might cause labor to begin early. If placenta accreta causes bleeding during your pregnancy, you might need to deliver your baby early.
Bright red vaginal bleeding without pain during the second half of pregnancy is the main sign of placenta previa. Some women also have contractions.
In many women diagnosed with placenta previa early in their pregnancies, the placenta previa resolves. As the uterus grows, it might increase the distance between the cervix and the placenta. The more the placenta covers the cervix and the later in the pregnancy that it remains over the cervix, the less likely it is to resolve.
If you have vaginal bleeding during your second or third trimester, call your doctor right away. If the bleeding is severe, seek emergency medical care.
The exact cause of placenta previa is unknown.
Placenta previa is more common among women who: Have had a baby, Have scars on the uterus, such as from previous surgery, including cesarean deliveries, uterine fibroid removal, and dilation and curettage, Had placenta previa with a previous pregnancy, Are carrying more than one fetus, Are age 35 or older, Are of a race other than white, Smoke, Use cocaine.
If you have placenta previa, your health care provider will monitor you and your baby to reduce the risk of these serious complications:
Bleeding. Severe, possibly life-threatening vaginal bleeding (hemorrhage) can occur during labor, delivery or in the first few hours after delivery.
Preterm birth. Severe bleeding may prompt an emergency C-section before your baby is full term.
Placental abruption is most likely to occur in the last trimester of pregnancy, especially in the last few weeks before birth. Signs and symptoms of placental abruption include: Vaginal bleeding, although there might not be any, Abdominal pain, Back pain, Uterine tenderness or rigidity, Uterine contractions, often coming one right after another.
Abdominal pain and back pain often begin suddenly. The amount of vaginal bleeding can vary greatly, and doesn't necessarily indicate how much of the placenta has separated from the uterus. It's possible for the blood to become trapped inside the uterus, so even with a severe placental abruption, there might be no visible bleeding.
In some cases, placental abruption develops slowly (chronic abruption), which can cause light, intermittent vaginal bleeding. Your baby might not grow as quickly as expected, and you might have low amniotic fluid or other complications.
Seek emergency care if you have signs or symptoms of placental abruption.
The cause of placental abruption is often unknown. Possible causes include trauma or injury to the abdomen — from an auto accident or fall, for example — or rapid loss of the fluid that surrounds and cushions the baby in the uterus (amniotic fluid).
Factors that can increase the risk of placental abruption include: Placental abruption in a previous pregnancy that wasn't caused by abdominal trauma, Chronic high blood pressure (hypertension), Hypertension-related problems during pregnancy, including preeclampsia, HELLP syndrome or eclampsia, A fall or other type of blow to the abdomen, Smoking, Cocaine use during pregnancy, Early rupture of membranes, which causes leaking amniotic fluid before the end of pregnancy, Infection inside of the uterus during pregnancy (chorioamnionitis), Being older, especially older than 40.
Placental abruption can cause life-threatening problems for both mother and baby.
For the mother, placental abruption can lead to: Shock due to blood loss, Blood clotting problems, The need for a blood transfusion, Failure of the kidneys or other organs resulting from blood loss, Rarely, the need for hysterectomy, if uterine bleeding can't be controlled.
For the baby, placental abruption can lead to: Restricted growth from not getting enough nutrients, Not getting enough oxygen, Premature birth, Stillbirth.
Plague is divided into three main types — bubonic, septicemic and pneumonic — depending on which part of your body is involved. Signs and symptoms vary depending on the type of plague.
Bubonic plague is the most common variety of the disease. It's named after the swollen lymph nodes (buboes) that typically develop in the first week after you become infected. Buboes may be: Situated in the groin, armpit or neck, About the size of a chicken egg, Tender and firm to the touch.
Other bubonic plague signs and symptoms may include: Sudden onset of fever and chills, Headache, Fatigue or malaise, Muscle aches.
Septicemic plague occurs when plague bacteria multiply in your bloodstream. Signs and symptoms include: Fever and chills, Extreme weakness, Abdominal pain, diarrhea and vomiting, Bleeding from your mouth, nose or rectum, or under your skin, Shock, Blackening and death of tissue (gangrene) in your extremities, most commonly your fingers, toes and nose.
Pneumonic plague affects the lungs. It's the least common variety of plague but the most dangerous, because it can be spread from person to person via cough droplets. Signs and symptoms can begin within a few hours after infection, and may include: Cough, with bloody mucus (sputum), Difficulty breathing, Nausea and vomiting, High fever, Headache, Weakness, Chest pain.
Pneumonic plague progresses rapidly and may cause respiratory failure and shock within two days of infection. Pneumonic plague needs to be treated with antibiotics within a day after signs and symptoms first appear, or the infection is likely to be fatal.
If you begin to feel ill and have been in an area where plague has been known to occur, seek immediate medical attention. You'll need treatment with medication to prevent serious complications or death.
In the United States, plague has been transmitted to humans in several western and southwestern states — primarily New Mexico, Arizona, California and Colorado. Worldwide, plague is most common in rural and semirural parts of Africa (especially the African island of Madagascar), South America and Asia.
The plague bacteria, Yersinia pestis, is transmitted to humans through the bites of fleas that have previously fed on infected animals, such as: Rats, Mice, Squirrels, Rabbits, Prairie dogs, Chipmunks, Voles.
The bacteria can also enter your body if a break in your skin comes into contact with an infected animal's blood. Domestic cats and dogs can become infected with plague from flea bites or from eating infected rodents.
Pneumonic plague, which affects the lungs, is spread by inhaling infectious droplets coughed into the air by a sick animal or person.
The risk of developing plague is very low. Worldwide, only a few thousand people develop plague each year. However, your plague risk can be increased depending on the area where you live and travel, your job, and your hobbies.
Plague outbreaks are most common in rural and semirural areas that are overcrowded, have poor sanitation and have a high rodent population. The greatest number of human plague infections occur in Africa, especially the African island of Madagascar. Plague has also been transmitted to humans in parts of Asia and South America.
In the United States, plague is rare, but it has been known to occur in several western and southwestern states — primarily New Mexico, Arizona, California and Colorado.
Veterinarians and their assistants have a higher risk of coming into contact with domestic cats and dogs that may have become infected with plague. People who work outdoors in areas where plague-infected animals are common are also at higher risk of getting plague.
Camping, hunting or hiking in areas where plague-infected animals reside can increase your risk of being bitten by an infected flea.
Complications of plague may include:
Death. Most people who receive prompt antibiotic treatment survive bubonic plague. Untreated plague has a high fatality rate.
Gangrene. Blood clots in the tiny blood vessels of your fingers and toes can disrupt blood flow and cause that tissue to die. The portions of your fingers and toes that have died may need to be removed (amputated).
Meningitis. Rarely, plague may cause inflammation of the membranes surrounding your brain and spinal cord (meningitis).
Plantar fasciitis typically causes a stabbing pain in the bottom of your foot near the heel. The pain is usually the worst with the first few steps after awakening, although it can also be triggered by long periods of standing or when you get up after sitting. The pain is usually worse after exercise, not during it.
Your plantar fascia is in the shape of a bowstring, supporting the arch of your foot and absorbing shock when you walk. If tension and stress on this bowstring become too great, small tears can occur in the fascia. Repeated stretching and tearing can irritate or inflame the fascia, although the cause remains unclear in many cases of plantar fasciitis.
Even though plantar fasciitis can develop without an obvious cause, some factors can increase your risk of developing this condition. They include:
Age. Plantar fasciitis is most common between the ages of 40 and 60.
Certain types of exercise. Activities that place a lot of stress on your heel and attached tissue — such as long-distance running, ballet dancing and aerobic dance — can contribute to the onset of plantar fasciitis.
Foot mechanics. Flat feet, a high arch or even an abnormal pattern of walking can affect the way weight is distributed when you're standing and can put added stress on the plantar fascia.
Obesity. Excess pounds put extra stress on your plantar fascia.
Occupations that keep you on your feet. Factory workers, teachers and others who spend most of their work hours walking or standing on hard surfaces can damage the plantar fascia.
Ignoring plantar fasciitis may result in chronic heel pain that hinders your regular activities. Changing the way you walk as a way to relieve plantar fasciitis pain might lead to foot, knee, hip or back problems.
Plantar wart signs and symptoms include: A small, fleshy, rough, grainy growth (lesion) on the bottom of your foot, usually the base of the toes and forefoot or the heel, Hard, thickened skin (callus) over a well-defined "spot" on the skin, where a wart has grown inward, Black pinpoints, which are commonly called wart seeds but are actually small, clotted blood vessels, A lesion that interrupts the normal lines and ridges in the skin of your foot, Pain or tenderness when walking or standing.
See your doctor for the lesion on your foot if: The lesion is bleeding, painful or changes in appearance or color, You've tried treating the wart, but it persists, multiplies or recurs, Your discomfort interferes with activities, You also have diabetes or poor sensation in your feet, You also have a weakened immune system because of immune-suppressing drugs, HIV/AIDS or other immune system disorders, You aren't sure whether the lesion is a wart.
Plantar warts are caused by an infection with HPV in the outer layer of skin on the soles of your feet. They develop when the virus enters your body through tiny cuts, breaks or other weak spots on the bottoms of your feet.
HPV is very common, and more than 100 kinds of the virus exist. But only a few of them cause warts on the feet. Other types of HPV are more likely to cause warts on other areas of your skin or on mucous membranes.
Each person's immune system responds differently to HPV. Not everyone who comes in contact with it develops warts. Even people in the same family react to the virus differently.
The HPV strains that cause plantar warts aren't highly contagious. So the virus isn't easily transmitted by direct contact from one person to another. But it thrives in warm, moist environments. Consequently, you may contract the virus by walking barefoot around swimming pools or locker rooms. If the virus spreads from the first site of infection, more warts may appear.
Anyone can develop plantar warts, but this type of wart is more likely to affect: Children and teenagers, People with weakened immune systems, People who have had plantar warts before, People who walk barefoot where exposure to a wart-causing virus is common, such as locker rooms.
When plantar warts cause pain, you may alter your normal posture or gait — perhaps without realizing it. Eventually, this change in how you stand, walk or run can cause muscle or joint discomfort.
Signs and symptoms of pleurisy might include: Chest pain that worsens when you breathe, cough or sneeze, Shortness of breath — because you are trying to minimize breathing in and out, A cough — only in some cases, A fever — only in some cases.
Pain caused by pleurisy might worsen with movement of your upper body and can radiate to your shoulders or back.
Pleurisy can be accompanied by pleural effusion, atelectasis or empyema:
Pleural effusion. In some cases of pleurisy, fluid builds up in the small space between the two layers of tissue. This is called pleural effusion. When there is a fair amount of fluid, pleuritic pain lessens or disappears because the two layers of pleura are no longer in contact and don't rub together.
Atelectasis. A large amount of fluid in the pleural space can create pressure, compressing your lung to the point that it partially or completely collapses (atelectasis). This makes breathing difficult and might cause coughing.
Empyema. The extra fluid can also become infected, resulting in an accumulation of pus. This is called an empyema. An empyema is often accompanied by fever.
Call your doctor right away if you experience unexplained, intense chest pain during breathing. You might have a problem with your lungs, heart or pleura or an underlying illness for which you need prompt medical care.
A variety of underlying conditions can cause pleurisy. Causes include: Viral infection, such as the flu (influenza), Bacterial infection, such as pneumonia, Fungal infection, Autoimmune disorder, such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus, Lung cancer near the pleural surface, Pulmonary embolism, Tuberculosis (TB), Rib fracture or trauma, Certain inherited diseases, such as sickle cell disease, Certain medications.
The signs and symptoms of pneumonia vary from mild to severe, depending on factors such as the type of germ causing the infection, and your age and overall health. Mild signs and symptoms often are similar to those of a cold or flu, but they last longer.
Signs and symptoms of pneumonia may include: Chest pain when you breathe or cough, Confusion or changes in mental awareness (in adults age 65 and older), Cough, which may produce phlegm, Fatigue, Fever, sweating and shaking chills, Lower than normal body temperature (in adults older than age 65 and people with weak immune systems), Nausea, vomiting or diarrhea, Shortness of breath.
Newborns and infants may not show any sign of the infection. Or they may vomit, have a fever and cough, appear restless or tired and without energy, or have difficulty breathing and eating.
See your doctor if you have difficulty breathing, chest pain, persistent fever of 102 F (39 C) or higher, or persistent cough, especially if you're coughing up pus.
It's especially important that people in these high-risk groups see a doctor: Adults older than age 65, Children younger than age 2 with signs and symptoms, People with an underlying health condition or weakened immune system, People receiving chemotherapy or taking medication that suppresses the immune system.
For some older adults and people with heart failure or chronic lung problems, pneumonia can quickly become a life-threatening condition.
Many germs can cause pneumonia. The most common are bacteria and viruses in the air we breathe. Your body usually prevents these germs from infecting your lungs. But sometimes these germs can overpower your immune system, even if your health is generally good.
Pneumonia is classified according to the types of germs that cause it and where you got the infection.
Community-acquired pneumonia is the most common type of pneumonia. It occurs outside of hospitals or other health care facilities. It may be caused by:
Bacteria. The most common cause of bacterial pneumonia in the U.S. is Streptococcus pneumoniae. This type of pneumonia can occur on its own or after you've had a cold or the flu. It may affect one part (lobe) of the lung, a condition called lobar pneumonia.
Bacteria-like organisms. Mycoplasma pneumoniae also can cause pneumonia. It typically produces milder symptoms than do other types of pneumonia. Walking pneumonia is an informal name given to this type of pneumonia, which typically isn't severe enough to require bed rest.
Fungi. This type of pneumonia is most common in people with chronic health problems or weakened immune systems, and in people who have inhaled large doses of the organisms. The fungi that cause it can be found in soil or bird droppings and vary depending upon geographic location.
Viruses, including COVID-19. Some of the viruses that cause colds and the flu can cause pneumonia. Viruses are the most common cause of pneumonia in children younger than 5 years. Viral pneumonia is usually mild. But in some cases it can become very serious. Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) may cause pneumonia, which can become severe.
Some people catch pneumonia during a hospital stay for another illness. Hospital-acquired pneumonia can be serious because the bacteria causing it may be more resistant to antibiotics and because the people who get it are already sick. People who are on breathing machines (ventilators), often used in intensive care units, are at higher risk of this type of pneumonia.
Health care-acquired pneumonia is a bacterial infection that occurs in people who live in long-term care facilities or who receive care in outpatient clinics, including kidney dialysis centers. Like hospital-acquired pneumonia, health care-acquired pneumonia can be caused by bacteria that are more resistant to antibiotics.
Aspiration pneumonia occurs when you inhale food, drink, vomit or saliva into your lungs. Aspiration is more likely if something disturbs your normal gag reflex, such as a brain injury or swallowing problem, or excessive use of alcohol or drugs.
Pneumonia can affect anyone. But the two age groups at highest risk are: Children who are 2 years old or younger, People who are age 65 or older.
Other risk factors include:
Being hospitalized. You're at greater risk of pneumonia if you're in a hospital intensive care unit, especially if you're on a machine that helps you breathe (a ventilator).
Chronic disease. You're more likely to get pneumonia if you have asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or heart disease.
Smoking. Smoking damages your body's natural defenses against the bacteria and viruses that cause pneumonia.
Weakened or suppressed immune system. People who have HIV/AIDS, who've had an organ transplant, or who receive chemotherapy or long-term steroids are at risk.
Even with treatment, some people with pneumonia, especially those in high-risk groups, may experience complications, including:
Bacteria in the bloodstream (bacteremia). Bacteria that enter the bloodstream from your lungs can spread the infection to other organs, potentially causing organ failure.
Difficulty breathing. If your pneumonia is severe or you have chronic underlying lung diseases, you may have trouble breathing in enough oxygen. You may need to be hospitalized and use a breathing machine (ventilator) while your lung heals.
Fluid accumulation around the lungs (pleural effusion). Pneumonia may cause fluid to build up in the thin space between layers of tissue that line the lungs and chest cavity (pleura). If the fluid becomes infected, you may need to have it drained through a chest tube or removed with surgery.
Lung abscess. An abscess occurs if pus forms in a cavity in the lung. An abscess is usually treated with antibiotics. Sometimes, surgery or drainage with a long needle or tube placed into the abscess is needed to remove the pus.
The most common symptom of pneumonitis is shortness of breath, which may be accompanied by a dry cough. If pneumonitis is undetected or left untreated, you may gradually develop chronic pneumonitis, which can result in scarring (fibrosis) in the lungs.
Signs and symptoms of chronic pneumonitis include: Shortness of breath, Cough, Fatigue, Loss of appetite, Unintentional weight loss.
Call your doctor anytime you have difficulty breathing, no matter what might be the cause.
Pneumonitis occurs when an irritating substance causes the tiny air sacs (alveoli) in your lungs to become inflamed. This inflammation makes it difficult for oxygen to pass through the alveoli into the bloodstream.
Many irritants, ranging from airborne molds to chemotherapy drugs, have been linked to pneumonitis. But for most people, the specific substance causing the inflammation is never identified.
Pneumonitis causes may include:
Drugs. A variety of drugs can cause pneumonitis, including some antibiotics, several types of chemotherapy drugs and medications that keep your heartbeat regular. An overdose of aspirin can cause pneumonitis.
Molds and bacteria. Repeated exposure to some molds and bacteria can cause the lungs to become inflamed. Specific varieties of mold-related pneumonitis have received nicknames, such as "farmer's lung" or "hot tub lung."
Birds. Exposure to feathers or bird excrement is a common cause of pneumonitis.
Radiation treatments. Some people who undergo radiation therapy to the chest, such as for breast or lung cancer, may develop pneumonitis. Pneumonitis also can occur after whole-body radiation therapy, which is needed to prepare a person for a bone marrow transplant.
Some occupations and hobbies carry higher risks of pneumonitis, including:
Farming. Many types of farming operations expose workers to aerosolized mists and pesticides. Inhaling airborne particles from moldy hay is one of the most common causes of occupational pneumonitis. Mold particles also can be inhaled during harvests of grain and hay.
Bird handling. Poultry workers and people who breed or keep pigeons are often exposed to droppings, feathers and other materials that can cause pneumonitis.
Hot tubs and humidifiers. Moldy conditions in hot tubs can trigger pneumonitis because the bubbling action makes a mist that can be inhaled. Home humidifiers are another common reservoir for mold.
Some chemotherapy drugs can cause pneumonitis, as can radiation therapy to the lungs. The combination of the two increases the risk of irreversible lung disease.
Pneumonitis that goes unnoticed or untreated can cause irreversible lung damage.
In normal lungs, the air sacs stretch and relax with each breath. Chronic inflammation of the thin tissue lining each air sac causes scarring and makes the sacs less flexible. They become stiff like a dried sponge. This is called pulmonary fibrosis. In severe cases, pulmonary fibrosis can cause right heart failure, respiratory failure and death.
The main symptoms of a pneumothorax are sudden chest pain and shortness of breath.
These symptoms can be caused by a variety of health problems, and some can be life-threatening, so seek medical attention. If your chest pain is severe or breathing becomes increasingly difficult, get immediate emergency care.
A pneumothorax can be caused by:
Chest injury. Any blunt or penetrating injury to your chest can cause lung collapse. Some injuries may happen during physical assaults or car crashes, while others may inadvertently occur during medical procedures that involve the insertion of a needle into the chest.
Lung disease. Damaged lung tissue is more likely to collapse. Lung damage can be caused by many types of underlying diseases, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cystic fibrosis and pneumonia.
Ruptured air blisters. Small air blisters (blebs) can develop on the top of the lungs. These blebs sometimes burst — allowing air to leak into the space that surrounds the lungs.
Mechanical ventilation. A severe type of pneumothorax can occur in people who need mechanical assistance to breathe. The ventilator can create an imbalance of air pressure within the chest. The lung may collapse completely.
In general, men are far more likely to have a pneumothorax than are women. The type of pneumothorax caused by ruptured air blisters is most likely to occur in people between 20 and 40 years old, especially if the person is very tall and underweight.
Risk factors for a pneumothorax include:
Smoking. The risk increases with the length of time and the number of cigarettes smoked, even without emphysema.
Genetics. Certain types of pneumothorax appear to run in families.
Lung disease. Having an underlying lung disease — especially chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) — makes a collapsed lung more likely.
Mechanical ventilation. People who need mechanical ventilation to assist their breathing are at higher risk of pneumothorax.
Previous pneumothorax. Anyone who has had one pneumothorax is at increased risk of another.
Many people who have had one pneumothorax can have another, typically within one to two years of the first.
Sometimes air may continue to leak if the opening in the lung won't close. Surgery may be needed to close the air leak.
Signs and symptoms of a poison ivy rash include: Redness, Itching, Swelling, Blisters, Difficulty breathing, if you've inhaled the smoke from burning poison ivy.
Poison ivy rash often appears in a straight line because of the way the plant brushes against your skin. But if you develop a rash after touching a piece of clothing or pet fur that has urushiol on it, the rash may be more spread out. You can also transfer the oil to other parts of your body with your fingers. The reaction usually develops 12 to 48 hours after exposure and lasts two to three weeks.
The severity of the rash depends on the amount of urushiol that gets on your skin.
Seek emergency medical attention if: You inhaled the smoke from burning poison ivy and are having difficulty breathing.
See your doctor if: The reaction is severe or widespread, Your skin continues to swell, The rash affects your eyes, mouth or genitals, Blisters are oozing pus, You develop a fever greater than 100 F (37.8 C), The rash doesn't get better within a few weeks.
Poison ivy rash is caused by an allergic reaction to an oily resin called urushiol. It's found in poison ivy, poison oak and poison sumac. This oily resin is very sticky, so it easily attaches to your skin, clothing, tools, equipment and pet's fur. You can get a poison ivy reaction from:
Touching the plant. If you touch the leaves, stem, roots or berries of the plant, you may have a reaction.
Touching contaminated objects. If you walk through some poison ivy and then later touch your shoes, you might get urushiol on your hands. You might then transfer it to your face or body by touching or rubbing. If the contaminated object isn't cleaned, the urushiol on it can still cause a skin reaction years later.
Inhaling smoke from the burning plants. Even the smoke from burning poison ivy, poison oak and poison sumac can irritate or harm your nasal passages or lungs.
Pus that oozes from blisters doesn't contain urushiol and won't spread the rash. But it's possible to get poison ivy rash from someone if you touch plant resin that's still on the person or contaminated clothing.
Your risk of a rash is increased if you participate in outdoor activities that put you at higher risk of exposure to poison ivy, poison oak and poison sumac: Cable or telephone line installation, Camping, Construction, Farming, Firefighting, Fishing from the shoreline, Forestry, Gardening, Hiking, Hunting, Landscaping.
If you scratch a poison ivy rash, bacteria under your fingernails may cause the skin to become infected. See your doctor if pus starts oozing from the blisters. Your doctor might prescribe antibiotics. Serious difficulty breathing and inflammation of the lining of the lungs may result from inhaling urushiol.
Although polio can cause paralysis and death, the majority of people who are infected with the virus don't get sick and aren't aware they've been infected.
Some people who develop symptoms from the poliovirus contract a type of polio that doesn't lead to paralysis (abortive polio). This usually causes the same mild, flu-like signs and symptoms typical of other viral illnesses.
Signs and symptoms, which can last up to 10 days, include: Fever, Sore throat, Headache, Vomiting, Fatigue, Back pain or stiffness, Neck pain or stiffness, Pain or stiffness in the arms or legs, Muscle weakness or tenderness.
This most serious form of the disease is rare. Initial signs and symptoms of paralytic polio, such as fever and headache, often mimic those of nonparalytic polio. Within a week, however, other signs and symptoms appear, including: Loss of reflexes, Severe muscle aches or weakness, Loose and floppy limbs (flaccid paralysis).
Post-polio syndrome is a cluster of disabling signs and symptoms that affect some people years after having polio. Common signs and symptoms include: Progressive muscle or joint weakness and pain, Fatigue, Muscle wasting (atrophy), Breathing or swallowing problems, Sleep-related breathing disorders, such as sleep apnea, Decreased tolerance of cold temperatures.
Check with your doctor for polio vaccination recommendations before traveling to a part of the world where polio still occurs naturally or where oral polio vaccine (OPV) is used, such as Central and South America, Africa and Asia.
Additionally, call your doctor if: Your child hasn't completed the vaccine series, Your child has an allergic reaction to the polio vaccine, Your child has problems other than a mild redness or soreness at the vaccine injection site, You had polio years ago and are now having unexplained weakness and fatigue.
Poliovirus can be transmitted through direct contact with someone infected with the virus or, less commonly, through contaminated food and water. People carrying the poliovirus can spread the virus for weeks in their feces. People who have the virus but don't have symptoms can pass the virus to others.
Polio mainly affects children younger than 5. However, anyone who hasn't been vaccinated is at risk of developing the disease.
Paralytic polio can lead to temporary or permanent muscle paralysis, disability, bone deformities and death.
Polycystic kidney disease symptoms can include: High blood pressure, Back or side pain, Blood in your urine, A feeling of fullness in your abdomen, Increased size of your abdomen due to enlarged kidneys, Headaches, Kidney stones, Kidney failure, Urinary tract or kidney infections.
It's not uncommon for people to have polycystic kidney disease for years without knowing it.
If you develop some of the signs and symptoms of polycystic kidney disease, see your doctor. If you have a first-degree relative — parent, sibling or child — with polycystic kidney disease, see your doctor to discuss screening for this disorder.
Abnormal genes cause polycystic kidney disease, which means that in most cases, the disease runs in families. Sometimes, a genetic mutation occurs on its own (spontaneous), so that neither parent has a copy of the mutated gene.
The two main types of polycystic kidney disease, caused by different genetic flaws, are:
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). Signs and symptoms of ADPKD often develop between the ages of 30 and 40. In the past, this type was called adult polycystic kidney disease, but children can develop the disorder.
Only one parent needs to have the disease for it to pass to the children. If one parent has ADPKD, each child has a 50% chance of getting the disease. This form accounts for most of the cases of polycystic kidney disease.
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). This type is far less common than is ADPKD. The signs and symptoms often appear shortly after birth. Sometimes, symptoms don't appear until later in childhood or during adolescence.
Both parents must have abnormal genes to pass on this form of the disease. If both parents carry a gene for this disorder, each child has a 25% chance of getting the disease.
Complications associated with polycystic kidney disease include:
High blood pressure. Elevated blood pressure is a common complication of polycystic kidney disease. Untreated, high blood pressure can cause further damage to your kidneys and increase your risk of heart disease and strokes.
Loss of kidney function. Progressive loss of kidney function is one of the most serious complications of polycystic kidney disease. Nearly half of those with the disease have kidney failure by age 60.
PKD can interfere with the ability of your kidneys to keep wastes from building to toxic levels, a condition called uremia. As the disease worsens, end-stage kidney (renal) disease may result, necessitating ongoing kidney dialysis or a transplant to prolong your life.
Chronic pain. Pain is a common symptom for people with polycystic kidney disease. It often occurs in your side or back. The pain can also be associated with a urinary tract infection, a kidney stone or a malignancy.
Growth of cysts in the liver. The likelihood of developing liver cysts for someone with polycystic kidney disease increases with age. While both men and women develop cysts, women often develop larger cysts. Female hormones and multiple pregnancies might contribute to liver cyst development.
Development of an aneurysm in the brain. A balloon-like bulge in a blood vessel (aneurysm) in your brain can cause bleeding (hemorrhage) if it ruptures. People with polycystic kidney disease have a higher risk of aneurysms. People with a family history of aneurysms seem to be at highest risk. Ask your doctor if screening is needed in your case. If screening reveals that you don't have an aneurysm, your doctor may recommend repeating the screening exam in a few years or after several years as a follow-up. The timing of repeat screening depends on your risk.
Pregnancy complications. Pregnancy is successful for most women with polycystic kidney disease. In some cases, however, women may develop a life-threatening disorder called preeclampsia. Those most at risk have high blood pressure or a decline in kidney function before they become pregnant.
Heart valve abnormalities. As many as 1 in 4 adults with polycystic kidney disease develops mitral valve prolapse. When this happens, the heart valve no longer closes properly, which allows blood to leak backward.
Colon problems. Weaknesses and pouches or sacs in the wall of the colon (diverticulosis) may develop in people with polycystic kidney disease.
Signs and symptoms of PCOS often develop around the time of the first menstrual period during puberty. Sometimes PCOS develops later, for example, in response to substantial weight gain.
Signs and symptoms of PCOS vary. A diagnosis of PCOS is made when you experience at least two of these signs:
Irregular periods. Infrequent, irregular or prolonged menstrual cycles are the most common sign of PCOS. For example, you might have fewer than nine periods a year, more than 35 days between periods and abnormally heavy periods.
Excess androgen. Elevated levels of male hormones may result in physical signs, such as excess facial and body hair (hirsutism), and occasionally severe acne and male-pattern baldness.
Polycystic ovaries. Your ovaries might be enlarged and contain follicles that surround the eggs. As a result, the ovaries might fail to function regularly.
PCOS signs and symptoms are typically more severe if you're obese.
See your doctor if you have concerns about your menstrual periods, if you're experiencing infertility or if you have signs of excess androgen such as worsening hirsutism, acne and male-pattern baldness.
The exact cause of PCOS isn't known. Factors that might play a role include:
Excess insulin. Insulin is the hormone produced in the pancreas that allows cells to use sugar, your body's primary energy supply. If your cells become resistant to the action of insulin, then your blood sugar levels can rise and your body might produce more insulin. Excess insulin might increase androgen production, causing difficulty with ovulation.
Low-grade inflammation. This term is used to describe white blood cells' production of substances to fight infection. Research has shown that women with PCOS have a type of low-grade inflammation that stimulates polycystic ovaries to produce androgens, which can lead to heart and blood vessel problems.
Heredity. Research suggests that certain genes might be linked to PCOS.
Excess androgen. The ovaries produce abnormally high levels of androgen, resulting in hirsutism and acne.
Complications of PCOS can include: Infertility, Gestational diabetes or pregnancy-induced high blood pressure, Miscarriage or premature birth, Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis — a severe liver inflammation caused by fat accumulation in the liver, Metabolic syndrome — a cluster of conditions including high blood pressure, high blood sugar, and abnormal cholesterol or triglyceride levels that significantly increase your risk of cardiovascular disease, Type 2 diabetes or prediabetes, Sleep apnea, Depression, anxiety and eating disorders, Abnormal uterine bleeding, Cancer of the uterine lining (endometrial cancer).
Obesity is associated with PCOS and can worsen complications of the disorder.
Many people with polycythemia vera don't have noticeable signs or symptoms. Some people might develop vague symptoms such as headache, dizziness, fatigue and blurred vision.
More-specific symptoms of polycythemia vera include: Itchiness, especially after a warm bath or shower, Numbness, tingling, burning, or weakness in your hands, feet, arms or legs, A feeling of fullness soon after eating and bloating or pain in your left upper abdomen due to an enlarged spleen, Unusual bleeding, such as a nosebleed or bleeding gums, Painful swelling of one joint, often the big toe, Shortness of breath and difficulty breathing when lying down.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have signs or symptoms of polycythemia vera.
Polycythemia vera occurs when a mutation in a gene causes a problem with blood cell production. Normally, your body regulates the number of each of the three types of blood cells you have — red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets. But in polycythemia vera, your bone marrow makes too many of some of these blood cells.
The cause of the gene mutation in polycythemia vera is unknown, but it's generally not inherited from your parents.
Polycythemia vera can occur at any age, but it's more common in adults between 50 and 75. Men are more likely to get polycythemia vera, but women tend to get the disease at younger ages.
Possible complications of polycythemia vera include:
Blood clots. Increased blood thickness and decreased blood flow, as well as abnormalities in your platelets, raise your risk of blood clots. Blood clots can cause a stroke, a heart attack, or a blockage in an artery in your lungs or a vein deep within a leg muscle or in the abdomen.
Enlarged spleen. Your spleen helps your body fight infection and filter unwanted material, such as old or damaged blood cells. The increased number of blood cells caused by polycythemia vera makes your spleen work harder than normal, which causes it to enlarge.
Problems due to high levels of red blood cells. Too many red blood cells can lead to a number of other complications, including open sores on the inside lining of your stomach, upper small intestine or esophagus (peptic ulcers) and inflammation in your joints (gout).
Other blood disorders. In rare cases, polycythemia vera can lead to other blood diseases, including a progressive disorder in which bone marrow is replaced with scar tissue, a condition in which stem cells don't mature or function properly, or cancer of the blood and bone marrow (acute leukemia).
Polyhydramnios symptoms result from pressure being exerted within the uterus and on nearby organs.
Mild polyhydramnios may cause few — if any — signs or symptoms. Severe polyhydramnios may cause: Shortness of breath or the inability to breathe, Swelling in the lower extremities and abdominal wall, Uterine discomfort or contractions, Fetal malposition, such as breech presentation.
Your health care provider may also suspect polyhydramnios if your uterus is excessively enlarged and he or she has trouble feeling the baby.
Some of the known causes of polyhydramnios include: A birth defect that affects the baby's gastrointestinal tract or central nervous system, Maternal diabetes, Twin-twin transfusion — a possible complication of identical twin pregnancies in which one twin receives too much blood and the other too little, A lack of red blood cells in the baby (fetal anemia), Blood incompatibilities between mother and baby, Infection during pregnancy.
Often, however, the cause of polyhydramnios isn't clear.
Polyhydramnios is associated with: Premature birth, Premature rupture of membranes — when your water breaks early, Placental abruption — when the placenta peels away from the inner wall of the uterus before delivery, Umbilical cord prolapse — when the umbilical cord drops into the vagina ahead of the baby, C-section delivery, Stillbirth, Heavy bleeding due to lack of uterine muscle tone after delivery.
The earlier that polyhydramnios occurs in pregnancy and the greater the amount of excess amniotic fluid, the higher the risk of complications.
The term "eruption" refers to the rash, which usually appears 30 minutes to several hours after exposure to sunlight. The rash typically appears on areas of the body that tend to be covered during winter but exposed in summer: the upper chest, front of the neck and arms.
Characteristics of the rash may include: Dense clusters of small bumps and blisters, Red, raised rough patches, Itching or burning.
Rarely people may have other signs or symptoms, such as fever, chills, headache or nausea. These conditions may be the result of an associated sunburn rather than polymorphous light eruption.
When to see a doctor
See your doctor if you have any rash with no obvious cause, such as a known allergy or recent contact with poison ivy.
Polymorphous light eruption rashes look similar to rashes caused by other diseases, some of which are serious. So it's important to get a prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment.
Seek immediate medical care if your rash is: Widespread, Painful, Accompanied by fever.
The exact cause of polymorphous light eruption isn't well-understood. The rash appears in people who have developed sensitivity to components of sunlight, and in particular ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun or other sources, such as tanning beds or tanning lamps. This sensitivity is called photosensitivity. It results in immune system activity that causes a rash.
UV radiation is a wavelength of sunlight in a range too short for the human eye to see. UV light that reaches the earth is divided into two wavelength bands — ultraviolet A (UVA) and ultraviolet B (UVB).
A person with photosensitivity can react to both types of UV radiation. Although UVB doesn't penetrate glass, UVA does. UVA may even penetrate through most sunscreens. So exposure to sunlight through windows or even sunscreen-protected skin may cause a reaction in some people with photosensitivity.
Sensitivity to sunlight lessens with repeated exposure in polymorphous light eruption. Features of polymorphous light eruption are somewhat predictable:
An episode is most likely to occur after the first one or two exposures to sunlight after a long period of no exposure. This usually means that an episode occurs during the spring or early summer or during a winter vacation in a sunnier location.
Episodes are less likely to occur as the summer progresses.
After the first episode of polymorphous light eruption, additional episodes are likely to recur each spring or early summer.
Some people gradually become less sensitive over several years and eventually no longer experience the annual rash.
Anyone can develop polymorphous light eruption, but several factors are associated with an increased risk of the condition: Being female, Experiencing the first episode during the teenage years or 20s, Having light skin and living in northern regions, Having a family history of the condition.
The signs and symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica usually occur on both sides of the body and might include: Aches or pain in your shoulders, Aches or pain in your neck, upper arms, buttocks, hips or thighs, Stiffness in affected areas, particularly in the morning or after being inactive for a time, Limited range of motion in affected areas, Pain or stiffness in your wrists, elbows or knees.
You might also have more-general signs and symptoms, including: Mild fever, Fatigue, A general feeling of not being well (malaise), Loss of appetite, Unintended weight loss, Depression.
See your doctor if you have aches, pains or stiffness that: Is new, Disrupts your sleep, Limits your ability to do your usual activities, such as getting dressed.
The exact cause of polymyalgia rheumatica is unknown. Two factors appear to be involved in the development of this condition:
Genetics. Certain genes and gene variations might increase your susceptibility.
An environmental exposure. New cases of polymyalgia rheumatica tend to come in cycles, possibly developing seasonally. This suggests that an environmental trigger, such as a virus, might play a role. But no specific virus has been shown to cause polymyalgia rheumatica.
Polymyalgia rheumatica and another disease known as giant cell arteritis share many similarities. Many people who have one of these diseases also have symptoms of the other.
Giant cell arteritis results in inflammation in the lining of the arteries, most often the arteries in the temples. Signs and symptoms include headaches, jaw pain, vision problems and scalp tenderness. If left untreated, this condition can lead to stroke or blindness.
Risk factors for polymyalgia rheumatica include:
Age. Polymyalgia rheumatica affects older adults almost exclusively. It most often occurs between ages 70 and 80.
Sex. Women are about two to three times more likely to develop the disorder.
Race. Polymyalgia rheumatica is most common among white people whose ancestors were from Scandinavia or northern Europe.
Symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica can greatly affect your ability to perform everyday activities, such as: Getting out of bed, standing up from a chair or getting out of a car, Combing your hair or bathing, Getting dressed.
These difficulties can affect your health, social interactions, physical activity, sleep and general well-being.
The muscle weakness associated with polymyositis involves the muscles closest to the trunk, such as those in your hips, thighs, shoulders, upper arms and neck. The weakness affects both the left and right sides of your body, and tends to gradually worsen.
Seek medical attention if you develop unexplained muscle weakness.
The exact cause of polymyositis is unknown, but the disease shares many characteristics with autoimmune disorders, in which your immune system mistakenly attacks your own body tissues.
Your risk of polymyositis is higher if you have lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, or Sjogren's syndrome.
Possible complications of polymyositis include:
Difficulty swallowing. If the muscles in your esophagus are affected, you may have problems swallowing (dysphagia), which in turn may cause weight loss and malnutrition.
Aspiration pneumonia. Difficulty swallowing may also cause you to breathe food or liquids, including saliva, into your lungs (aspiration), which can lead to pneumonia.
Breathing problems. If your chest muscles are affected by the disease, you may experience breathing problems, such as shortness of breath or, in severe cases, respiratory failure.
Although these are not complications, polymyositis is often associated with other conditions that may cause further complications of their own, or in combination with polymyositis symptoms. Associated conditions include:
Raynaud's phenomenon. This is a condition in which your fingers, toes, cheeks, nose and ears initially turn pale when exposed to cold temperatures.
Other connective tissue diseases. Other conditions, such as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma and Sjogren's syndrome, can occur in combination with polymyositis.
Cardiovascular disease. Polymyositis may cause the muscular walls of your heart to become inflamed (myocarditis). In a small number of people who have polymyositis, congestive heart failure and heart arrhythmias may develop.
Lung disease. A condition called interstitial lung disease may occur with polymyositis. Interstitial lung disease refers to a group of disorders that cause scarring (fibrosis) of lung tissue, making lungs stiff and inelastic. Signs and symptoms include a dry cough and shortness of breath.
Cancer. People who have polymyositis have an elevated risk of cancer.
The main symptom of popliteal artery entrapment syndrome (PAES) is pain or cramping in the back of the lower leg (the calf) that occurs during exercise and goes away with rest. Other signs and symptoms may include: Cold feet after exercise, Tingling or burning in your calf (paresthesia), Numbness in the calf area.
If the nearby vein (popliteal vein) also becomes trapped by the calf muscle, you may have: Heavy feeling in the leg, Lower leg cramping at night, Swelling in the calf area, Changes in skin color around the calf muscle, Blood clots in the lower leg (deep vein thrombosis).
Symptoms typically affect young, otherwise healthy people under age 40.
See your doctor if you have any type of leg pain, especially if you have calf or foot cramping during activity that gets better with rest.
Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome (PAES) is caused by an abnormal calf muscle, usually the gastrocnemius muscle.
The condition may occur from birth (congenital) or develop later in life (acquired). In the congenital form, the calf muscle or nearby artery is abnormally positioned while the baby grows in the mother's womb. People with the acquired form of PAES have a calf muscle that is bigger than normal (enlarged).
The abnormal calf muscle presses on the main artery behind the knee (popliteal artery), reducing blood flow to the lower leg. The lack of blood flow results in pain and cramping in the back of the lower leg during times of activity.
Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome (PAES) is uncommon. The following things increase your risk of the condition.
Younger age. The condition is most often seen in people who are in their late teens or 20s. It's rarely diagnosed in those over age 40.
Being male. PAES can occur in anyone, but it's much more common in young men.
Strenuous athletic activity. Runners, bicyclists, and athletes who try to build muscle fast with weight training routines or high-intensity circuit training are at the highest risk.
Long-term pressure on the popliteal artery can cause the artery to narrow (stenosis), causing pain and cramping with just slight activity, such as walking.
In severe cases or when undiagnosed, the nerves and muscles in the leg can become damaged. Blood clots may occur in the lower leg (deep vein thrombosis). Older athletes with signs and symptoms of popliteal artery entrapment syndrome should be checked for popliteal aneurysm, which is common in older men.
Symptoms of porphyria can vary widely in severity, by type and among individuals. Some people with the gene mutations that cause porphyria never have any symptoms.
Acute porphyrias include forms of the disease that typically cause nervous system symptoms, which appear quickly and can be severe. Symptoms may last days to weeks and usually improve slowly after the attack. Acute intermittent porphyria is the common form of acute porphyria.
Signs and symptoms of acute porphyria may include: Severe abdominal pain, Pain in your chest, legs or back, Constipation or diarrhea, Nausea and vomiting, Muscle pain, tingling, numbness, weakness or paralysis, Red or brown urine, Mental changes, such as anxiety, confusion, hallucinations, disorientation or paranoia, Breathing problems, Urination problems, Rapid or irregular heartbeats you can feel (palpitations), High blood pressure, Seizures.
Cutaneous porphyrias include forms of the disease that cause skin symptoms as a result of sensitivity to sunlight, but these forms don't usually affect your nervous system. Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is the most common type of all the porphyrias.
As a result of sun exposure, you may experience: Sensitivity to the sun and sometimes artificial light, causing burning pain, Sudden painful skin redness (erythema) and swelling (edema, Blisters on exposed skin, usually the hands, arms and face, Fragile thin skin with changes in skin color (pigment), Itching, Excessive hair growth in affected areas, Red or brown urine.
Many signs and symptoms of porphyria are similar to those of other, more common conditions. This can make it difficult to know if you're having an attack of porphyria. If you have any of the above symptoms, seek medical attention.
All types of porphyria involve a problem in the production of heme. Heme is a component of hemoglobin, the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen from your lungs to all parts of your body. Heme production, which occurs in the bone marrow and liver, involves eight different enzymes — a shortage (deficiency) of a specific enzyme determines the type of porphyria.
In cutaneous porphyria, the porphyrins build up in the skin, and when exposed to sunlight, cause symptoms. In acute porphyrias, the buildup damages the nervous system.
Most forms of porphyria are inherited. Porphyria can occur if you inherit: A defective gene from one of your parents (autosomal dominant pattern), Defective genes from both parents (autosomal recessive pattern).
Just because you inherit a gene or genes that can cause porphyria doesn't mean that you'll have signs and symptoms. You might have what's called latent porphyria, and never have symptoms. This is the case for most carriers of the abnormal genes.
Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) typically is acquired rather than inherited, although the enzyme deficiency may be inherited. Certain triggers that impact enzyme production — such as too much iron in the body, liver disease, estrogen medication, smoking or excessive alcohol use — can cause symptoms.
In addition to genetic risks, environmental factors may trigger the development of signs and symptoms in porphyria. When exposed to the trigger, your body's demand for heme production increases. This overwhelms the deficient enzyme, setting in motion a process that causes a buildup of porphyrins.
Examples of triggers include: Exposure to sunlight, Certain medications, including hormone drugs, Recreational drugs, Dieting or fasting, Smoking, Physical stress, such as infections or other illnesses, Emotional stress, Alcohol use, Menstrual hormones ― acute porphyria attacks are rare before puberty and after menopause in women.
Possible complications depend on the form of porphyria:
Acute porphyrias can be life-threatening if an attack isn't promptly treated. During an attack, you may experience dehydration, breathing problems, seizures and high blood pressure. Episodes often require hospitalization for treatment. Long-term complications with recurrent acute attacks may include chronic pain, chronic kidney failure and liver damage.
Cutaneous porphyrias can result in permanent skin damage. Also, the skin blisters can become infected. When your skin heals after cutaneous porphyria, it may have an abnormal appearance and coloring, be fragile, or leave scars.
Common signs and symptoms of post-polio syndrome include: Progressive muscle and joint weakness and pain, General fatigue and exhaustion with minimal activity, Muscle atrophy, Breathing or swallowing problems, Sleep-related breathing disorders, such as sleep apnea, Decreased tolerance of cold temperatures.
In most people, post-polio syndrome tends to progress slowly, with new signs and symptoms followed by periods of stability.
If you have increasing weakness or fatigue, see your doctor. It's important to rule out other causes of your signs and symptoms and determine whether you have post-polio syndrome.
There are several theories as to what causes post-polio syndrome, but no one knows for sure.
When poliovirus infects your body, it affects nerve cells called motor neurons — particularly those in your spinal cord — that carry messages (electrical impulses) between your brain and your muscles.
Each neuron consists of three basic components: A cell body, A major branching fiber (axon), Numerous smaller branching fibers (dendrites).
A polio infection often damages or destroys many of these motor neurons. To compensate for the resulting neuron shortage, the remaining neurons sprout new fibers, and the surviving motor units enlarge.
This promotes recovery of the use of your muscles, but it also pushes the nerve cell body to nourish the additional fibers. Over the years, this stress may be more than the neuron can handle, leading to the gradual deterioration of the sprouted fibers and, eventually, of the neuron itself.
Factors that can increase your risk of developing post-polio syndrome include:
Severity of initial polio infection. The more severe the initial infection, the more likely that you'll have signs and symptoms of post-polio syndrome.
Age at onset of initial illness. If you developed polio as an adolescent or adult rather than as a child, your chances of developing post-polio syndrome increase.
Recovery. The greater your recovery after acute polio, the more likely it seems that post-polio syndrome will develop, perhaps because greater recovery places additional stress on motor neurons.
Excessive physical activity. If you often exercise to the point of exhaustion or fatigue, you might overwork already stressed-out motor neurons and increase your risk of post-polio syndrome.
Post-polio syndrome is rarely life-threatening, but severe muscle weakness can lead to complications:
Falls. Weakness in your leg muscles makes it easier for you to lose your balance and fall. You then might break a bone, such as a hip, leading to other complications.
Malnutrition, dehydration and pneumonia. People who've had bulbar polio, which affects nerves leading to muscles involved in chewing and swallowing, often have difficulty with these activities and have other signs of post-polio syndrome.
Chewing and swallowing problems can lead to inadequate nutrition and to dehydration, as well as to aspiration pneumonia, which is caused by inhaling food particles into your lungs (aspirating).
Chronic respiratory failure. Weakness in your diaphragm and chest muscles makes it harder to take deep breaths and cough, which can cause fluid and mucus to build up in your lungs.
Obesity, smoking, curvature of the spine, anesthesia, prolonged immobility and certain medications can further decrease your breathing ability, possibly leading to a sharp drop in blood oxygen levels (acute respiratory failure). You might then need treatment to help you breathe (ventilation therapy).
Osteoporosis. Prolonged inactivity and immobility are often accompanied by loss of bone density and osteoporosis in both men and women. If you have post-polio syndrome, talk to your doctor about bone-density screening.
Post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms may start within one month of a traumatic event, but sometimes symptoms may not appear until years after the event. These symptoms cause significant problems in social or work situations and in relationships. They can also interfere with your ability to go about your normal daily tasks.
PTSD symptoms are generally grouped into four types: intrusive memories, avoidance, negative changes in thinking and mood, and changes in physical and emotional reactions. Symptoms can vary over time or vary from person to person.
Intrusive memories
Symptoms of intrusive memories may include: Recurrent, unwanted distressing memories of the traumatic event, Reliving the traumatic event as if it were happening again (flashbacks), Upsetting dreams or nightmares about the traumatic event, Severe emotional distress or physical reactions to something that reminds you of the traumatic event.
Avoidance
Symptoms of avoidance may include: Trying to avoid thinking or talking about the traumatic event, Avoiding places, activities or people that remind you of the traumatic event.
Negative changes in thinking and mood
Symptoms of negative changes in thinking and mood may include: Negative thoughts about yourself, other people or the world, Hopelessness about the future, Memory problems, including not remembering important aspects of the traumatic event, Difficulty maintaining close relationships, Feeling detached from family and friends, Lack of interest in activities you once enjoyed, Difficulty experiencing positive emotions, Feeling emotionally numb.
Changes in physical and emotional reactions
Symptoms of changes in physical and emotional reactions (also called arousal symptoms) may include: Being easily startled or frightened, Always being on guard for danger, Self-destructive behavior, such as drinking too much or driving too fast, Trouble sleeping, Trouble concentrating, Irritability, angry outbursts or aggressive behavior, Overwhelming guilt or shame.
For children 6 years old and younger, signs and symptoms may also include: Re-enacting the traumatic event or aspects of the traumatic event through play, Frightening dreams that may or may not include aspects of the traumatic event.
Intensity of symptoms
PTSD symptoms can vary in intensity over time. You may have more PTSD symptoms when you're stressed in general, or when you come across reminders of what you went through. For example, you may hear a car backfire and relive combat experiences. Or you may see a report on the news about a sexual assault and feel overcome by memories of your own assault.
When to see a doctor
If you have disturbing thoughts and feelings about a traumatic event for more than a month, if they're severe, or if you feel you're having trouble getting your life back under control, talk to your doctor or a mental health professional. Getting treatment as soon as possible can help prevent PTSD symptoms from getting worse.
If you have suicidal thoughts
If you or someone you know has suicidal thoughts, get help right away through one or more of these resources:
Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
Contact a minister, a spiritual leader or someone in your faith community.
Call a suicide hotline number — in the United States, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) to reach a trained counselor. Use that same number and press 1 to reach the Veterans Crisis Line.
Make an appointment with your doctor or a mental health professional.
When to get emergency help
If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
If you know someone who's in danger of attempting suicide or has made a suicide attempt, make sure someone stays with that person to keep him or her safe. Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately. Or, if you can do so safely, take the person to the nearest hospital emergency room.
You can develop post-traumatic stress disorder when you go through, see or learn about an event involving actual or threatened death, serious injury or sexual violation.
Doctors aren't sure why some people get PTSD. As with most mental health problems, PTSD is probably caused by a complex mix of: Stressful experiences, including the amount and severity of trauma you've gone through in your life, Inherited mental health risks, such as a family history of anxiety and depression, Inherited features of your personality — often called your temperament, The way your brain regulates the chemicals and hormones your body releases in response to stress.
People of all ages can have post-traumatic stress disorder. However, some factors may make you more likely to develop PTSD after a traumatic event, such as: Experiencing intense or long-lasting trauma, Having experienced other trauma earlier in life, such as childhood abuse, Having a job that increases your risk of being exposed to traumatic events, such as military personnel and first responders, Having other mental health problems, such as anxiety or depression, Having problems with substance misuse, such as excess drinking or drug use, Lacking a good support system of family and friends, Having blood relatives with mental health problems, including anxiety or depression.
Kinds of traumatic events
The most common events leading to the development of PTSD include: Combat exposure, Childhood physical abuse, Sexual violence, Physical assault, Being threatened with a weapon, An accident.
Many other traumatic events also can lead to PTSD, such as fire, natural disaster, mugging, robbery, plane crash, torture, kidnapping, life-threatening medical diagnosis, terrorist attack, and other extreme or life-threatening events.
Post-traumatic stress disorder can disrupt your whole life ― your job, your relationships, your health and your enjoyment of everyday activities.
Having PTSD may also increase your risk of other mental health problems, such as: Depression and anxiety, Issues with drugs or alcohol use, Eating disorders, Suicidal thoughts and actions.
Signs and symptoms of a PCL injury can include:
Pain. Mild to moderate pain in the knee can cause a slight limp or difficulty walking.
Swelling. Knee swelling occurs rapidly, within hours of the injury.
Instability. Your knee might feel loose, as if it's going to give way.
If there are no associated injuries to other parts of your knee, the signs and symptoms of a posterior cruciate ligament injury can be so mild that you might not notice that anything's wrong. Over time, the pain might worsen and your knee might feel more unstable. If other parts of your knee have also been injured, your signs and symptoms will likely be more severe.
The posterior cruciate ligament can tear if your shinbone is hit hard just below the knee or if you fall on a bent knee. These injuries are most common during:
Motor vehicle accidents. A "dashboard injury" occurs when the driver's or passenger's bent knee slams against the dashboard, pushing in the shinbone just below the knee and causing the posterior cruciate ligament to tear.
Contact sports. Athletes in sports such as football and soccer can tear their posterior cruciate ligament when they fall on a bent knee with their foot pointed down. The shinbone hits the ground first and it moves backward. Being tackled when your knee is bent also can cause this injury.
Being in a motor vehicle accident and participating in sports such as football and soccer are the most common risk factors for a PCL injury.
In many cases, other structures within the knee — including other ligaments or cartilage — also are damaged when you injure your posterior cruciate ligament. Depending on how many of these structures are damaged, you might have some long-term knee pain and instability. You might also be at higher risk of eventually developing arthritis in your affected knee.
A small posterior vaginal prolapse (rectocele) may cause no signs or symptoms.
Otherwise, you may notice: A soft bulge of tissue in your vagina that might protrude through the vaginal opening, Difficulty having a bowel movement, Sensation of rectal pressure or fullness, A feeling that the rectum has not completely emptied after a bowel movement, Sexual concerns, such as feeling embarrassed or sensing looseness in the tone of your vaginal tissue.
Many women with posterior vaginal prolapse also experience prolapse of other pelvic organs, such as the bladder, uterus or — for women who have had surgery to remove the uterus (hysterectomy) — the top of the vagina.
Posterior vaginal prolapse is common, even in women who haven't had children. In fact, you may not even know you have posterior vaginal prolapse.
But sometimes moderate or severe posterior vaginal prolapses can be bothersome or uncomfortable. See your doctor if: You have a bothersome bulge of tissue that protrudes through your vaginal opening, Constipation treatment isn't successful at producing soft and easy-to-pass stool between three times a day to three times a week.
Posterior vaginal prolapse results from pressure on the pelvic floor. Causes of increased pelvic floor pressure include: Chronic constipation or straining with bowel movements, Chronic cough or bronchitis, Repeated heavy lifting, Being overweight or obese.
The muscles, ligaments and connective tissue that support your vagina become stretched and weakened during pregnancy, labor and delivery. The more pregnancies you have, the greater your chance of developing posterior vaginal prolapse.
Women who have had only cesarean deliveries are less likely to develop posterior vaginal prolapse, but still may.
Factors that may increase your risk of posterior vaginal prolapse include:
Genetics. Some women are born with weaker connective tissues in the pelvic area, making them naturally more likely to develop posterior vaginal prolapse.
Childbirth. If you have vaginally delivered multiple children, you have a higher risk of developing posterior vaginal prolapse. If you've had tears in the tissue between the vaginal opening and anus (perineal tears) or incisions that extend the opening of the vagina (episiotomies) during childbirth, you may also be at higher risk.
Aging. As you grow older, you naturally lose muscle mass, elasticity and nerve function, causing muscles to stretch or weaken.
Obesity. Extra body weight places stress on pelvic floor tissues.
The signs and symptoms of postherpetic neuralgia are generally limited to the area of your skin where the shingles outbreak first occurred — most commonly in a band around your trunk, usually on one side of your body.
Signs and symptoms might include:
Pain that lasts three months or longer after the shingles rash has healed. The associated pain has been described as burning, sharp and jabbing, or deep and aching.
Sensitivity to light touch. People with the condition often can't bear even the touch of clothing on the affected skin (allodynia).
Itching and numbness. Less commonly, postherpetic neuralgia can produce an itchy feeling or numbness.
See a doctor at the first sign of shingles. Often the pain starts before you notice a rash. Your risk of developing postherpetic neuralgia is lessened if you begin taking antiviral medications within 72 hours of developing the shingles rash.
Once you've had chickenpox, the virus remains in your body for the rest of your life. As you age or if your immune system is suppressed, such as from medications or chemotherapy, the virus can reactivate, causing shingles.
Postherpetic neuralgia occurs if your nerve fibers are damaged during an outbreak of shingles. Damaged fibers can't send messages from your skin to your brain as they normally do. Instead, the messages become confused and exaggerated, causing chronic, often excruciating pain that can last months — or even years.
When you have shingles, you might be at greater risk of developing postherpetic neuralgia as a result of:
Age. You're older than 50.
Severity of shingles. You had a severe rash and severe pain.
Other illness. You have a chronic disease, such as diabetes.
Shingles location. You had shingles on your face or torso.
Your shingles antiviral treatment was delayed for more than 72 hours after your rash appeared.
Depending on how long postherpetic neuralgia lasts and how painful it is, people with the condition can develop other symptoms that are common with chronic pain such as: Depression, Fatigue, Difficulty sleeping, Lack of appetite, Difficulty concentrating.
Signs and symptoms of depression after childbirth vary, and they can range from mild to severe.
Signs and symptoms of baby blues — which last only a few days to a week or two after your baby is born — may include: Mood swings, Anxiety, Sadness, Irritability, Feeling overwhelmed, Crying, Reduced concentration, Appetite problems, Trouble sleeping.
Postpartum depression may be mistaken for baby blues at first — but the signs and symptoms are more intense and last longer, and may eventually interfere with your ability to care for your baby and handle other daily tasks. Symptoms usually develop within the first few weeks after giving birth, but may begin earlier ― during pregnancy ― or later — up to a year after birth.
Postpartum depression signs and symptoms may include: Depressed mood or severe mood swings, Excessive crying, Difficulty bonding with your baby, Withdrawing from family and friends, Loss of appetite or eating much more than usual, Inability to sleep (insomnia) or sleeping too much, Overwhelming fatigue or loss of energy, Reduced interest and pleasure in activities you used to enjoy, Intense irritability and anger, Fear that you're not a good mother, Hopelessness, Feelings of worthlessness, shame, guilt or inadequacy, Diminished ability to think clearly, concentrate or make decisions, Restlessness, Severe anxiety and panic attacks, Thoughts of harming yourself or your baby, Recurrent thoughts of death or suicide.
Untreated, postpartum depression may last for many months or longer.
With postpartum psychosis — a rare condition that typically develops within the first week after delivery — the signs and symptoms are severe. Signs and symptoms may include: Confusion and disorientation, Obsessive thoughts about your baby, Hallucinations and delusions, Sleep disturbances, Excessive energy and agitation, Paranoia, Attempts to harm yourself or your baby.
Postpartum psychosis may lead to life-threatening thoughts or behaviors and requires immediate treatment.
New fathers can experience postpartum depression, too. They may feel sad or fatigued, be overwhelmed, experience anxiety, or have changes in their usual eating and sleeping patterns ― the same symptoms mothers with postpartum depression experience.
Fathers who are young, have a history of depression, experience relationship problems or are struggling financially are most at risk of postpartum depression. Postpartum depression in fathers ― sometimes called paternal postpartum depression ― can have the same negative effect on partner relationships and child development as postpartum depression in mothers can.
If you're a new father and are experiencing symptoms of depression or anxiety during your partner's pregnancy or in the first year after your child's birth, talk to your health care professional. Similar treatments and supports provided to mothers with postpartum depression can be beneficial in treating postpartum depression in fathers.
If you're feeling depressed after your baby's birth, you may be reluctant or embarrassed to admit it. But if you experience any symptoms of postpartum baby blues or postpartum depression, call your doctor and schedule an appointment. If you have symptoms that suggest you may have postpartum psychosis, get help immediately.
It's important to call your doctor as soon as possible if the signs and symptoms of depression have any of these features: Don't fade after two weeks, Are getting worse, Make it hard for you to care for your baby, Make it hard to complete everyday tasks, Include thoughts of harming yourself or your baby.
If at any point you have thoughts of harming yourself or your baby, immediately seek help from your partner or loved ones in taking care of your baby and call 911 or your local emergency assistance number to get help.
Also consider these options if you're having suicidal thoughts:
Seek help from your primary care provider or other health care professional.
Call a mental health professional.
Call a suicide hotline. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) or use their webchat on suicidepreventionlifeline.org/chat.
Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.
People with depression may not recognize or acknowledge that they're depressed. They may not be aware of signs and symptoms of depression. If you suspect that a friend or loved one has postpartum depression or is developing postpartum psychosis, help them seek medical attention immediately. Don't wait and hope for improvement.
There's no single cause of postpartum depression, but physical and emotional issues may play a role.
Physical changes. After childbirth, a dramatic drop in hormones (estrogen and progesterone) in your body may contribute to postpartum depression. Other hormones produced by your thyroid gland also may drop sharply — which can leave you feeling tired, sluggish and depressed.
Emotional issues. When you're sleep deprived and overwhelmed, you may have trouble handling even minor problems. You may be anxious about your ability to care for a newborn. You may feel less attractive, struggle with your sense of identity or feel that you've lost control over your life. Any of these issues can contribute to postpartum depression.
Any new mom can experience postpartum depression and it can develop after the birth of any child, not just the first. However, your risk increases if: You have a history of depression, either during pregnancy or at other times, You have bipolar disorder, You had postpartum depression after a previous pregnancy, You have family members who've had depression or other mood disorders, You've experienced stressful events during the past year, such as pregnancy complications, illness or job loss, Your baby has health problems or other special needs, You have twins, triplets or other multiple births, You have difficulty breast-feeding, You're having problems in your relationship with your spouse or significant other, You have a weak support system, You have financial problems, The pregnancy was unplanned or unwanted.
Left untreated, postpartum depression can interfere with mother-child bonding and cause family problems.
For mothers. Untreated postpartum depression can last for months or longer, sometimes becoming a chronic depressive disorder. Even when treated, postpartum depression increases a woman's risk of future episodes of major depression.
For fathers. Postpartum depression can have a ripple effect, causing emotional strain for everyone close to a new baby. When a new mother is depressed, the risk of depression in the baby's father may also increase. And new dads are already at increased risk of depression, whether or not their partner is affected.
For children. Children of mothers who have untreated postpartum depression are more likely to have emotional and behavioral problems, such as sleeping and eating difficulties, excessive crying, and delays in language development.
Postpartum preeclampsia can be difficult to detect on your own. Many women who experience postpartum preeclampsia show no signs or symptoms during pregnancy. Also, you might not suspect that anything is wrong when you're focused on recovering after childbirth and caring for a newborn.
Signs and symptoms of postpartum preeclampsia — which are typically the same as symptoms of preeclampsia — might include: High blood pressure (hypertension) — 140/90 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) or greater, Excess protein in your urine (proteinuria), Severe headaches, Changes in vision, including temporary loss of vision, blurred vision or light sensitivity, Upper abdominal pain, usually under the ribs on the right side, Decreased urination.
If you have signs or symptoms of postpartum preeclampsia shortly after childbirth, contact your health care provider right away. Depending on the circumstances, you might need immediate medical care.
The causes of postpartum preeclampsia and preeclampsia that occurs during pregnancy aren't well-understood.
Limited research suggests that risk factors for postpartum preeclampsia might include:
High blood pressure during your most recent pregnancy. You're at increased risk of postpartum preeclampsia if you developed high blood pressure after 20 weeks of pregnancy (gestational hypertension).
Obesity. The risk of postpartum preeclampsia is higher if you're obese.
Having multiples. Having twins, triplets or more increases your risk of preeclampsia.
Chronic high blood pressure. Having uncontrolled high blood pressure before pregnancy increases your risk of preeclampsia and postpartum preeclampsia.
Diabetes. Having type 1 or type 2 diabetes increases your risk of preeclampsia and postpartum preeclampsia.
Complications of postpartum preeclampsia include:
Postpartum eclampsia. Postpartum eclampsia is essentially postpartum preeclampsia plus seizures. Postpartum eclampsia can permanently damage vital organs, including your brain, eyes, liver and kidneys.
Pulmonary edema. This life-threatening lung condition occurs when excess fluid develops in the lungs.
Stroke. A stroke occurs when the blood supply to part of the brain is interrupted or severely reduced, depriving brain tissue of oxygen and food. A stroke is a medical emergency.
Thromboembolism. Thromboembolism is the blockage of a blood vessel by a blood clot that travels from another part of the body. This condition is also a medical emergency.
HELLP syndrome. HELLP syndrome — which stands for hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelet count — can be life-threatening. Hemolysis is the destruction of red blood cells.
During postpartum thyroiditis, you might experience two phases. The inflammation and release of thyroid hormone might first cause mild signs and symptoms similar to those of an overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism), including: Anxiety, Irritability, Rapid heartbeat or palpitations, Unexplained weight loss, Increased sensitivity to heat, Fatigue, Tremor, Insomnia.
These signs and symptoms typically occur one to four months after delivery and last one to three months.
Later, as thyroid cells become impaired, mild signs and symptoms of underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) might develop, including: Lack of energy, Increased sensitivity to cold, Constipation, Dry skin, Weight gain, Depression.
These signs and symptoms typically begin four to six weeks after the symptoms of hyperthyroidism resolve and can last six to 12 months.
Keep in mind, however, that some women who have postpartum thyroiditis develop symptoms of only hyperthyroidism or only hypothyroidism.
The exact cause of postpartum thyroiditis isn't clear. However, women who develop postpartum thyroiditis often have high concentrations of anti-thyroid antibodies in early pregnancy and after childbirth. As a result, it's believed that women who develop postpartum thyroiditis likely have an underlying autoimmune thyroid condition that flares after childbirth due to fluctuations in immune function. This underlying condition appears to be very similar to Hashimoto's thyroiditis, in which the immune system attacks the thyroid gland.
You might be at increased risk of postpartum thyroiditis if you have: An autoimmune disorder, such as type 1 diabetes, A history of postpartum thyroiditis, High concentrations of anti-thyroid antibodies, A history of previous thyroid problems, A family history of thyroid problems.
While further research is needed, some studies have also shown a link between postpartum thyroiditis and postpartum depression. As a result, if you have postpartum depression your doctor will likely check to see how your thyroid is functioning.
For most women who develop postpartum thyroiditis, thyroid function eventually returns to normal — typically within 12 to 18 months of the start of symptoms. However, some women who experience postpartum thyroiditis don't recover from the hypothyroid phase. As a result, they develop hypothyroidism, a condition in which the thyroid gland doesn't produce enough of certain important hormones.
Signs and symptoms of pouchitis can include diarrhea, abdominal pain, joint pain, cramps and fever. Other signs and symptoms include an increased number of bowel movements, nighttime stool leakage, difficulty controlling bowel movements and a strong urge to have a bowel movement.
Signs and symptoms of Prader-Willi syndrome can vary among individuals. Symptoms may slowly change over time from childhood to adulthood.
Signs and symptoms that may be present from birth include:
Poor muscle tone. A primary sign during infancy is poor muscle tone (hypotonia). Babies may rest with their elbows and knees loosely extended instead of fixed, and they may feel floppy or like rag dolls when they're held.
Distinct facial features. Children may be born with almond-shaped eyes, a narrowing of the head at the temples, a turned-down mouth and a thin upper lip.
Poor sucking reflex. Infants may have a poor sucking reflex due to decreased muscle tone. Poor sucking makes feeding difficult and can result in failure to thrive.
Generally poor responsiveness. A baby may seem unusually tired, respond poorly to stimulation, have a hard time waking up or have a weak cry.
Underdeveloped genitals. Males may have a small penis and scrotum. The testicles may be small or not descended from the abdomen into the scrotum (cryptorchidism). In females, the clitoris and labia may be small.
Other features of Prader-Willi syndrome appear during early childhood and remain throughout life, requiring careful management. These features may include:
Food craving and weight gain. A classic sign of Prader-Willi syndrome is a constant craving for food, resulting in rapid weight gain, starting around age 2 years. Constant hunger leads to eating often and consuming large portions. Unusual food-seeking behaviors, such as hoarding food, or eating frozen food or even garbage, may develop.
Underdeveloped sex organs. A condition called hypogonadism occurs when sex organs (testes in men and ovaries in women) produce little or no sex hormones. This results in underdeveloped sex organs, incomplete or delayed puberty, and in nearly all cases, infertility. Without treatment, women may not start menstruating until their 30s or may never menstruate, and men may not have much facial hair and their voices may never fully deepen.
Poor growth and physical development. Underproduction of growth hormone can result in short adult height, low muscle mass and high body fat. Other endocrine problems may include underproduction of thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism) or central adrenal insufficiency, which prevents the body from responding appropriately during stress or infections.
Cognitive impairment. Mild to moderate intellectual disability, such as issues with thinking, reasoning and problem-solving, is a common feature of the disorder. Even those without significant intellectual disability have some learning disabilities.
Delayed motor development. Toddlers with Prader-Willi syndrome often reach milestones in physical movement — for example, sitting up or walking — later than other children do.
Speech problems. Speech is often delayed. Poor articulation of words may be an ongoing problem into adulthood.
Behavioral problems. Children and adults may at times be stubborn, angry, controlling or manipulative. They may throw temper tantrums, especially when denied food, and may not tolerate changes in routine. They may also develop obsessive-compulsive or repetitive behaviors, or both. Other mental health disorders, such as anxiety and skin picking, may develop.
Sleep disorders. Children and adults with Prader-Willi syndrome may have sleep disorders, including disruptions of the normal sleep cycle and a condition in which breathing pauses during sleep (sleep apnea). These disorders can result in excessive daytime sleepiness and worsen behavior problems.
Other signs and symptoms. These may include small hands and feet, curvature of the spine (scoliosis), hip problems, reduced saliva flow, nearsightedness and other vision problems, problems regulating body temperature, a high pain tolerance, or a lack of pigment (hypopigmentation) causing hair, eyes and skin to be pale.
Regularly scheduled well-baby visits can help identify early signs of poor growth and development, which can be signs of Prader-Willi syndrome or other disorders.
If you have concerns about your baby's health between well-baby visits, schedule an appointment with your child's doctor.
Prader-Willi syndrome is a genetic disorder, a condition caused by an error in one or more genes. Although the exact mechanisms responsible for Prader-Willi syndrome haven't been identified, the problem lies in the genes located in a particular region of chromosome 15.
With the exception of genes related to sex characteristics, all genes come in pairs — one copy inherited from your father (paternal gene) and one copy inherited from your mother (maternal gene). For most types of genes, if one copy is "active," or expressed, then the other copy also is expressed, although it's normal for some types of genes to act alone.
Prader-Willi syndrome occurs because certain paternal genes that should be expressed are not for one of these reasons:
Paternal genes on chromosome 15 are missing.
The child inherited two copies of chromosome 15 from the mother and no chromosome 15 from the father.
There's some error or defect in paternal genes on chromosome 15.
In Prader-Willi syndrome, a defect on chromosome 15 disrupts the normal functions of a portion of the brain called the hypothalamus, which controls the release of hormones. A hypothalamus that isn't functioning properly can interfere with processes that result in problems with hunger, growth, sexual development, body temperature, mood and sleep.
In most cases, Prader-Willi syndrome is caused by a random genetic error and is not inherited. Determining which genetic defect caused Prader-Willi syndrome can be helpful in genetic counseling.
In addition to having constant hunger, people with Prader-Willi syndrome have low muscle mass, so they need fewer than average calories, and they may not be physically active. This combination of factors makes them prone to obesity and the medical problems related to obesity, such as: Type 2 diabetes, High blood pressure, high cholesterol and heart disease, Sleep apnea, Other complications, such as an increased risk of liver disease and gallbladder stones.
Complications arising from inadequate hormone production may include:
Sterility. Although there have been a few reports of women with Prader-Willi syndrome becoming pregnant, most people with this disorder are unable to have children.
Osteoporosis. Osteoporosis causes bones to become weak and brittle, so they may break easily. People with Prader-Willi syndrome are at an increased risk of developing osteoporosis because they have low levels of sex hormones and may also have low levels of growth hormone — both hormones help maintain strong bones.
Other complications that can result from Prader-Willi syndrome include:
Effects of binge eating. Eating large amounts of food quickly, called binge eating, can cause the stomach to become abnormally enlarged. People with Prader-Willi syndrome may not report pain and they rarely vomit. Binge eating can also cause choking. Rarely, a person may eat so much that it causes stomach rupture.
Reduced quality of life. Behavioral problems can interfere with family functioning, successful education and social participation. They can also reduce the quality of life for children, teenagers and adults with Prader-Willi syndrome.
Precocious puberty signs and symptoms include development of the following before age 8 in girls and before age 9 in boys. Breast growth and first period in girls, Enlarged testicles and penis, facial hair and deepening voice in boys, Pubic or underarm hair, Rapid growth, Acne, Adult body odor.
Make an appointment with your child's doctor for an evaluation if your child has any of the signs or symptoms of precocious puberty.
To understand what causes precocious puberty in some children, it's helpful to know what causes puberty to begin. The brain starts the process with the production of a hormone called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH).
When this hormone reaches the pituitary gland — a small bean-shaped gland at the base of your brain — it leads to the production of more hormones in the ovaries for females (estrogen) and the testicles for males (testosterone).
Estrogen is involved in the growth and development of female sexual characteristics. Testosterone is responsible for the growth and development of male sexual characteristics.
Why this process begins early in some children depends on whether they have central precocious puberty or peripheral precocious puberty.
The cause for this type of precocious puberty often can't be identified.
In central precocious puberty, the puberty process starts too soon. The pattern and timing of the steps in the process are otherwise normal. For the majority of children with this condition, there's no underlying medical problem and no identifiable reason for the early puberty.
In rare cases, central precocious puberty may be caused by: A tumor in the brain or spinal cord (central nervous system), A defect in the brain present at birth, such as excess fluid buildup (hydrocephalus) or a noncancerous tumor (hamartoma), Radiation to the brain or spinal cord, Injury to the brain or spinal cord, McCune-Albright syndrome — a rare genetic disease that affects bones and skin color and causes hormonal problems, Congenital adrenal hyperplasia — a group of genetic disorders involving abnormal hormone production by the adrenal glands, Hypothyroidism — a condition in which the thyroid gland doesn't produce enough hormones.
Estrogen or testosterone in your child's body causes this type of precocious puberty.
The less common peripheral precocious puberty occurs without the involvement of the hormone in your brain (GnRH) that normally triggers the start of puberty. Instead, the cause is release of estrogen or testosterone into the body because of problems with the ovaries, testicles, adrenal glands or pituitary gland.
In both girls and boys, the following may lead to peripheral precocious puberty: A tumor in the adrenal glands or in the pituitary gland that releases estrogen or testosterone, McCune-Albright syndrome, a rare genetic disorder that affects the skin color and bones and causes hormonal problems, Exposure to external sources of estrogen or testosterone, such as creams or ointments.
In girls, peripheral precocious puberty may also be associated with: Ovarian cysts, Ovarian tumors.
In boys, peripheral precocious puberty may also be caused by:
A tumor in the cells that make sperm (germ cells) or in the cells that make testosterone (Leydig cells).
A rare disorder called gonadotropin-independent familial sexual precocity, which is caused by a defect in a gene, can result in the early production of testosterone in boys, usually between ages 1 and 4.
Factors that increase a child's risk of precocious puberty include:
Being a girl. Girls are much more likely to develop precocious puberty.
Being African-American. Precocious puberty appears to affect African-Americans more often than children of other races.
Being obese. Children who are significantly overweight have a higher risk of developing precocious puberty.
Being exposed to sex hormones. Coming in contact with an estrogen or testosterone cream or ointment, or other substances that contain these hormones (such as an adult's medication or dietary supplements), can increase your child's risk of developing precocious puberty.
Having other medical conditions. Precocious puberty may be a complication of McCune-Albright syndrome or congenital adrenal hyperplasia — conditions that involve abnormal production of the male hormones (androgens). In rare cases, precocious puberty may also be associated with hypothyroidism.
Having received radiation therapy of the central nervous system. Radiation treatment for tumors, leukemia or other conditions can increase the risk of precocious puberty.
Possible complications of precocious puberty include:
Short height. Children with precocious puberty may grow quickly at first and be tall, compared with their peers. But, because their bones mature more quickly than normal, they often stop growing earlier than usual. This can cause them to be shorter than average as adults. Early treatment of precocious puberty, especially when it occurs in very young children, can help them grow taller than they would without treatment.
Social and emotional problems. Girls and boys who begin puberty long before their peers may be extremely self-conscious about the changes occurring in their bodies. This may affect self-esteem and increase the risk of depression or substance abuse.
Prediabetes doesn't usually have any signs or symptoms.
One possible sign of prediabetes is darkened skin on certain parts of the body. Affected areas can include the neck, armpits, elbows, knees and knuckles.
Classic signs and symptoms that suggest you've moved from prediabetes to type 2 diabetes include: Increased thirst, Frequent urination, Excess hunger, Fatigue, Blurred vision.
See your doctor if you're concerned about diabetes or if you notice any type 2 diabetes signs or symptoms. Ask your doctor about blood sugar screening if you have any risk factors for diabetes.
The exact cause of prediabetes is unknown. But family history and genetics appear to play an important role. A lack of regular physical activity and being overweight with excess fat around your abdomen also seem to be important factors.
What is clear is that people with prediabetes don't process sugar (glucose) properly anymore. As a result, sugar builds up in the blood instead of doing its normal job of giving energy to the cells that make up muscles and other tissues.
Most of the glucose in your body comes from the food you eat. When food is digested, sugar enters your bloodstream. Moving sugar from your bloodstream to your body's cells requires a hormone called insulin.
Insulin comes from a gland located behind the stomach called the pancreas. Your pancreas sends insulin to your blood when you eat.
As insulin circulates, it allows sugar to enter your cells — and lowers the amount of sugar in your blood. When your blood sugar level starts to drop, the pancreas slows down the secretion of insulin into the blood.
When you have prediabetes, this process doesn't work as well. Your pancreas may not make enough insulin or cells become resistant to insulin and don't allow as much sugar in. So, instead of fueling your cells, sugar builds up in your bloodstream.
The same factors that increase the odds of getting type 2 diabetes also increase the risk of prediabetes. These factors include:
Weight. Being overweight is a primary risk factor for prediabetes. The more fatty tissue you have — especially inside and between the muscle and skin around your abdomen — the more resistant your cells become to insulin.
Waist size. A large waist size can indicate insulin resistance. The risk of insulin resistance goes up for men with waists larger than 40 inches and for women with waists larger than 35 inches.
Diet. Eating red meat and processed meat, and drinking sugar-sweetened beverages, is associated with a higher risk of prediabetes. A diet high in fruits, vegetables, nuts, whole grains and olive oil is associated with a lower risk of prediabetes.
Inactivity. The less active you are, the greater your risk of prediabetes. Physical activity helps you control your weight, uses up sugar for energy and makes the body use insulin more effectively.
Age. Although diabetes can develop at any age, the risk of prediabetes increases after age 45.
Family history. Your risk of prediabetes increases if you have a parent or sibling with type 2 diabetes.
Race or ethnicity. Although it's unclear why, certain people — including Black, Hispanic, American Indian and Asian American people — are more likely to develop prediabetes.
Gestational diabetes. If you had diabetes while pregnant (gestational diabetes), you and your child are at higher risk of developing prediabetes. If you've had gestational diabetes, your doctor will likely check your blood sugar levels at least once every three years.
Polycystic ovary syndrome. Women with this common condition — characterized by irregular menstrual periods, excess hair growth and obesity — have a higher risk of prediabetes.
Sleep. People with obstructive sleep apnea — a condition that disrupts sleep repeatedly — have an increased risk of insulin resistance.
Tobacco smoke. Smoking may increase insulin resistance. Smokers also seem to carry more weight around the middle.
Other conditions associated with prediabetes include: High blood pressure, Low levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, the "good" cholesterol, High levels of triglycerides — a type of fat in your blood.
When these conditions occur with obesity, they are associated with insulin resistance.
The combination of three or more of these conditions is often called metabolic syndrome.
The most serious consequence of prediabetes is progression to type 2 diabetes. That's because type 2 diabetes can lead to: High blood pressure, High cholesterol, Heart disease, Stroke, Kidney disease, Nerve damage, Vision problems, possibly loss of vision, Amputations.
Prediabetes has been linked with unrecognized (silent) heart attacks and can damage your kidneys, even if you haven't progressed to type 2 diabetes.
Preeclampsia sometimes develops without any symptoms. High blood pressure may develop slowly, or it may have a sudden onset. Monitoring your blood pressure is an important part of prenatal care because the first sign of preeclampsia is commonly a rise in blood pressure. Blood pressure that exceeds 140/90 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) or greater — documented on two occasions, at least four hours apart — is abnormal.
Other signs and symptoms of preeclampsia may include: Excess protein in your urine (proteinuria) or additional signs of kidney problems, Severe headaches, Changes in vision, including temporary loss of vision, blurred vision or light sensitivity, Upper abdominal pain, usually under your ribs on the right side, Nausea or vomiting, Decreased urine output, Decreased levels of platelets in your blood (thrombocytopenia), Impaired liver function, Shortness of breath, caused by fluid in your lungs.
Sudden weight gain and swelling (edema) — particularly in your face and hands — may occur with preeclampsia. But these also occur in many normal pregnancies, so they're not considered reliable signs of preeclampsia.
Make sure you attend your prenatal visits so that your care provider can monitor your blood pressure. Contact your doctor immediately or go to an emergency room if you have severe headaches, blurred vision or other visual disturbance, severe pain in your abdomen, or severe shortness of breath.
Because headaches, nausea, and aches and pains are common pregnancy complaints, it's difficult to know when new symptoms are simply part of being pregnant and when they may indicate a serious problem — especially if it's your first pregnancy. If you're concerned about your symptoms, contact your doctor.
The exact cause of preeclampsia involves several factors. Experts believe it begins in the placenta — the organ that nourishes the fetus throughout pregnancy. Early in pregnancy, new blood vessels develop and evolve to efficiently send blood to the placenta.
In women with preeclampsia, these blood vessels don't seem to develop or function properly. They're narrower than normal blood vessels and react differently to hormonal signaling, which limits the amount of blood that can flow through them.
Causes of this abnormal development may include: Insufficient blood flow to the uterus, Damage to the blood vessels, A problem with the immune system, Certain genes.
Preeclampsia is classified as one of four high blood pressure disorders that can occur during pregnancy. The other three are:
Gestational hypertension. Women with gestational hypertension have high blood pressure but no excess protein in their urine or other signs of organ damage. Some women with gestational hypertension eventually develop preeclampsia.
Chronic hypertension. Chronic hypertension is high blood pressure that was present before pregnancy or that occurs before 20 weeks of pregnancy. But because high blood pressure usually doesn't have symptoms, it may be hard to determine when it began.
Chronic hypertension with superimposed preeclampsia. This condition occurs in women who have been diagnosed with chronic high blood pressure before pregnancy, but then develop worsening high blood pressure and protein in the urine or other health complications during pregnancy.
Preeclampsia develops only as a complication of pregnancy. Risk factors include:
History of preeclampsia. A personal or family history of preeclampsia significantly raises your risk of preeclampsia.
Chronic hypertension. If you already have chronic hypertension, you have a higher risk of developing preeclampsia.
First pregnancy. The risk of developing preeclampsia is highest during your first pregnancy.
New paternity. Each pregnancy with a new partner increases the risk of preeclampsia more than does a second or third pregnancy with the same partner.
Age. The risk of preeclampsia is higher for very young pregnant women as well as pregnant women older than 35.
Race. Black women have a higher risk of developing preeclampsia than women of other races.
Obesity. The risk of preeclampsia is higher if you're obese.
Multiple pregnancy. Preeclampsia is more common in women who are carrying twins, triplets or other multiples.
Interval between pregnancies. Having babies less than two years or more than 10 years apart leads to a higher risk of preeclampsia.
History of certain conditions. Having certain conditions before you become pregnant — such as chronic high blood pressure, migraines, type 1 or type 2 diabetes, kidney disease, a tendency to develop blood clots, or lupus — increases your risk of preeclampsia.
In vitro fertilization. Your risk of preeclampsia is increased if your baby was conceived with in vitro fertilization.
The more severe your preeclampsia and the earlier it occurs in your pregnancy, the greater the risks for you and your baby. Preeclampsia may require induced labor and delivery.
Delivery by cesarean delivery (C-section) may be necessary if there are clinical or obstetric conditions that require a speedy delivery. Otherwise, your doctor may recommend a scheduled vaginal delivery. Your obstetric provider will talk with you about what type of delivery is right for your condition.
Complications of preeclampsia may include:
Fetal growth restriction. Preeclampsia affects the arteries carrying blood to the placenta. If the placenta doesn't get enough blood, your baby may receive inadequate blood and oxygen and fewer nutrients. This can lead to slow growth known as fetal growth restriction, low birth weight or preterm birth.
Preterm birth. If you have preeclampsia with severe features, you may need to be delivered early, to save the life of you and your baby. Prematurity can lead to breathing and other problems for your baby. Your health care provider will help you understand when is the ideal time for your delivery.
Placental abruption. Preeclampsia increases your risk of placental abruption, a condition in which the placenta separates from the inner wall of your uterus before delivery. Severe abruption can cause heavy bleeding, which can be life-threatening for both you and your baby.
HELLP syndrome. HELLP — which stands for hemolysis (the destruction of red blood cells), elevated liver enzymes and low platelet count — syndrome is a more severe form of preeclampsia, and can rapidly become life-threatening for both you and your baby.
Symptoms of HELLP syndrome include nausea and vomiting, headache, and upper right abdominal pain. HELLP syndrome is particularly dangerous because it represents damage to several organ systems. On occasion, it may develop suddenly, even before high blood pressure is detected or it may develop without any symptoms at all.
Eclampsia. When preeclampsia isn't controlled, eclampsia — which is essentially preeclampsia plus seizures — can develop. It is very difficult to predict which patients will have preeclampsia that is severe enough to result in eclampsia.
Often, there are no symptoms or warning signs to predict eclampsia. Because eclampsia can have serious consequences for both mom and baby, delivery becomes necessary, regardless of how far along the pregnancy is.
Other organ damage. Preeclampsia may result in damage to the kidneys, liver, lung, heart, or eyes, and may cause a stroke or other brain injury. The amount of injury to other organs depends on the severity of preeclampsia.
Cardiovascular disease. Having preeclampsia may increase your risk of future heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease. The risk is even greater if you've had preeclampsia more than once or you've had a preterm delivery. To minimize this risk, after delivery try to maintain your ideal weight, eat a variety of fruits and vegetables, exercise regularly, and don't smoke.
Your baby may have very mild symptoms of premature birth, or may have more-obvious complications.
Some signs of prematurity include the following: Small size, with a disproportionately large head, Sharper looking, less rounded features than a full-term baby's features, due to a lack of fat stores, Fine hair (lanugo) covering much of the body, Low body temperature, especially immediately after birth in the delivery room, due to a lack of stored body fat, Labored breathing or respiratory distress, Lack of reflexes for sucking and swallowing, leading to feeding difficulties.
The following tables show the median birth weight, length and head circumference of premature babies at different gestational ages for each sex.
If you deliver a preterm baby, your baby will likely need a longer hospital stay in a special nursery unit at the hospital. Depending on how much care your baby requires, he or she may be admitted to an intermediate care nursery or the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). Doctors and a specialized team with training in taking care of preterm babies will be available to help care for your baby. Don't hesitate to ask questions.
Your baby may need extra help feeding, and adapting immediately after delivery. Your health care team can help you understand what is needed and what your baby's care plan will be.
Often, the specific cause of premature birth isn't clear. However, there are known risk factors of premature delivery, including: Having a previous premature birth, Pregnancy with twins, triplets or other multiples, An interval of less than six months between pregnancies, Conceiving through in vitro fertilization, Problems with the uterus, cervix or placenta, Smoking cigarettes or using illicit drugs, Some infections, particularly of the amniotic fluid and lower genital tract, Some chronic conditions, such as high blood pressure and diabetes, Being underweight or overweight before pregnancy, Stressful life events, such as the death of a loved one or domestic violence, Multiple miscarriages or abortions, Physical injury or trauma.
For unknown reasons, black women are more likely to experience premature birth than are women of other races. But premature birth can happen to anyone. In fact, many women who have a premature birth have no known risk factors.
While not all premature babies experience complications, being born too early can cause short-term and long-term health problems. Generally, the earlier a baby is born, the higher the risk of complications. Birth weight plays an important role, too.
Some problems may be apparent at birth, while others may not develop until later.
In the first weeks, the complications of premature birth may include:
Breathing problems. A premature baby may have trouble breathing due to an immature respiratory system. If the baby's lungs lack surfactant — a substance that allows the lungs to expand — he or she may develop respiratory distress syndrome because the lungs can't expand and contract normally.
Premature babies may also develop a lung disorder known as bronchopulmonary dysplasia. In addition, some preterm babies may experience prolonged pauses in their breathing, known as apnea.
Heart problems. The most common heart problems premature babies experience are patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and low blood pressure (hypotension). PDA is a persistent opening between the aorta and pulmonary artery. While this heart defect often closes on its own, left untreated it can lead to a heart murmur, heart failure as well as other complications. Low blood pressure may require adjustments in intravenous fluids, medicines and sometimes blood transfusions.
Brain problems. The earlier a baby is born, the greater the risk of bleeding in the brain, known as an intraventricular hemorrhage. Most hemorrhages are mild and resolve with little short-term impact. But some babies may have larger brain bleeding that causes permanent brain injury.
Temperature control problems. Premature babies can lose body heat rapidly. They don't have the stored body fat of a full-term infant, and they can't generate enough heat to counteract what's lost through the surface of their bodies. If body temperature dips too low, an abnormally low core body temperature (hypothermia) can result.
Hypothermia in a premature baby can lead to breathing problems and low blood sugar levels. In addition, a premature infant may use up all of the energy gained from feedings just to stay warm. That's why smaller premature infants require additional heat from a warmer or an incubator until they're larger and able to maintain body temperature without assistance.
Gastrointestinal problems. Premature infants are more likely to have immature gastrointestinal systems, resulting in complications such as necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). This potentially serious condition, in which the cells lining the bowel wall are injured, can occur in premature babies after they start feeding. Premature babies who receive only breast milk have a much lower risk of developing NEC.
Blood problems. Premature babies are at risk of blood problems such as anemia and newborn jaundice. Anemia is a common condition in which the body doesn't have enough red blood cells. While all newborns experience a slow drop in red blood cell count during the first months of life, the decrease may be greater in premature babies.
Newborn jaundice is a yellow discoloration in a baby's skin and eyes that occurs because the baby's blood contains excess bilirubin, a yellow-colored substance, from the liver or red blood cells. While there are many causes of jaundice, it is more common in preterm babies.
Metabolism problems. Premature babies often have problems with their metabolism. Some premature babies may develop an abnormally low level of blood sugar (hypoglycemia). This can happen because premature infants typically have smaller stores of stored glucose than do full-term babies. Premature babies also have more difficulty converting their stored glucose into more-usable, active forms of glucose.
Immune system problems. An underdeveloped immune system, common in premature babies, can lead to a higher risk of infection. Infection in a premature baby can quickly spread to the bloodstream, causing sepsis, an infection that spreads to the bloodstream.
In the long term, premature birth may lead to the following complications:
Cerebral palsy. Cerebral palsy is a disorder of movement, muscle tone or posture that can be caused by infection, inadequate blood flow or injury to a newborn's developing brain either early during pregnancy or while the baby is still young and immature.
Impaired learning. Premature babies are more likely to lag behind their full-term counterparts on various developmental milestones. Upon school age, a child who was born prematurely might be more likely to have learning disabilities.
Vision problems. Premature infants may develop retinopathy of prematurity, a disease that occurs when blood vessels swell and overgrow in the light-sensitive layer of nerves at the back of the eye (retina). Sometimes the abnormal retinal vessels gradually scar the retina, pulling it out of position. When the retina is pulled away from the back of the eye, it's called retinal detachment, a condition that, if undetected, can impair vision and cause blindness.
Hearing problems. Premature babies are at increased risk of some degree of hearing loss. All babies will have their hearing checked before going home.
Dental problems. Premature infants who have been critically ill are at increased risk of developing dental problems, such as delayed tooth eruption, tooth discoloration and improperly aligned teeth.
Behavioral and psychological problems. Children who experienced premature birth may be more likely than full-term infants to have certain behavioral or psychological problems, as well as developmental delays.
Chronic health issues. Premature babies are more likely to have chronic health issues — some of which may require hospital care — than are full-term infants. Infections, asthma and feeding problems are more likely to develop or persist. Premature infants are also at increased risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).
The main symptom of premature ejaculation is the inability to delay ejaculation for more than one minute after penetration. However, the problem might occur in all sexual situations, even during masturbation.
Premature ejaculation can be classified as:
Lifelong (primary). Lifelong premature ejaculation occurs all or nearly all of the time beginning with your first sexual encounters.
Acquired (secondary). Acquired premature ejaculation develops after you've had previous sexual experiences without ejaculatory problems.
Many men feel that they have symptoms of premature ejaculation, but the symptoms don't meet the diagnostic criteria for premature ejaculation. Instead these men might have natural variable premature ejaculation, which includes periods of rapid ejaculation as well as periods of normal ejaculation.
Talk with your doctor if you ejaculate sooner than you wish during most sexual encounters. It's common for men to feel embarrassed about discussing sexual health concerns, but don't let that keep you from talking to your doctor. Premature ejaculation is a common and treatable problem.
For some men, a conversation with a doctor might help lessen concerns about premature ejaculation. For example, it might be reassuring to hear that occasional premature ejaculation is normal and that the average time from the beginning of intercourse to ejaculation is about five minutes.
The exact cause of premature ejaculation isn't known. While it was once thought to be only psychological, doctors now know premature ejaculation involves a complex interaction of psychological and biological factors.
Psychological factors that might play a role include: Early sexual experiences, Sexual abuse, Poor body image, Depression, Worrying about premature ejaculation, Guilty feelings that increase your tendency to rush through sexual encounters.
Other factors that can play a role include:
Erectile dysfunction. Men who are anxious about obtaining or maintaining an erection during sexual intercourse might form a pattern of rushing to ejaculate, which can be difficult to change.
Anxiety. Many men with premature ejaculation also have problems with anxiety — either specifically about sexual performance or related to other issues.
Relationship problems. If you have had satisfying sexual relationships with other partners in which premature ejaculation happened infrequently or not at all, it's possible that interpersonal issues between you and your current partner are contributing to the problem.
A number of biological factors might contribute to premature ejaculation, including: Abnormal hormone levels, Abnormal levels of brain chemicals called neurotransmitters, Inflammation and infection of the prostate or urethra, Inherited traits.
Various factors can increase your risk of premature ejaculation, including:
Erectile dysfunction. You might be at increased risk of premature ejaculation if you occasionally or consistently have trouble getting or maintaining an erection. Fear of losing your erection might cause you to consciously or unconsciously hurry through sexual encounters.
Stress. Emotional or mental strain in any area of your life can play a role in premature ejaculation, limiting your ability to relax and focus during sexual encounters.
Premature ejaculation can cause problems in your personal life, including:
Stress and relationship problems. A common complication of premature ejaculation is relationship stress.
Fertility problems. Premature ejaculation can occasionally make fertilization difficult for couples who are trying to have a baby if ejaculation doesn't occur intravaginally.
Premature ventricular contractions often cause few or no symptoms. But you might feel an odd sensation in your chest, such as: Fluttering, Pounding or jumping, Skipped beats or missed beats, Increased awareness of your heartbeat.
If you feel fluttering, a sensation of skipped heartbeats or odd feelings in your chest, talk to your doctor. You'll want to identify the source of these symptoms, whether it's PVCs, other heart rhythm problems, serious heart problems, anxiety, anemia or infections.
Your heart is made up of four chambers — two upper chambers (atria) and two lower chambers (ventricles). The rhythm of your heart is normally controlled by the sinoatrial (SA) node — or sinus node — an area of specialized cells in the right atrium.
This natural pacemaker produces the electrical impulses that trigger the normal heartbeat. From the sinus node, electrical impulses travel across the atria to the ventricles, causing them to contract and pump blood to your lungs and body.
PVCs are abnormal contractions that begin in the ventricles. These extra contractions usually beat sooner than the next expected regular heartbeat. And they often interrupt the normal order of pumping, which is the atria first, then the ventricles.
The reasons aren't always clear. Certain triggers, heart diseases or changes in the body can make cells in the ventricles electrically unstable. Heart disease or scarring may also cause electrical impulses to be misrouted.
Premature ventricular contractions can be associated with: Certain medications, including decongestants and antihistamines, Alcohol or illegal drugs, Increased levels of adrenaline in the body that may be caused by caffeine, tobacco, exercise or anxiety, Injury to the heart muscle from coronary artery disease, congenital heart disease, high blood pressure or heart failure.
The following can increase your risk of PVCs: Caffeine , tobacco, alcohol and illicit drugs, Exercise — if you have certain types of PVCs, High blood pressure (hypertension), Anxiety, Heart disease, including congenital heart disease, coronary artery disease, heart attack, heart failure and a weakened heart muscle (cardiomyopathy).
Having frequent PVCs or certain patterns of them might increase your risk of developing heart rhythm problems (arrhythmias) or weakening of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy).
Rarely, when accompanied by heart disease, frequent premature contractions can lead to chaotic, dangerous heart rhythms and possibly sudden cardiac death.
The list of potential signs and symptoms for premenstrual syndrome is long, but most women only experience a few of these problems. Tension or anxiety, Depressed mood, Crying spells, Mood swings and irritability or anger, Appetite changes and food cravings, Trouble falling asleep (insomnia), Social withdrawal, Poor concentration, Change in libido.
Joint or muscle pain, Headache, Fatigue, Weight gain related to fluid retention, Abdominal bloating, Breast tenderness, Acne flare-ups, Constipation or diarrhea, Alcohol intolerance.
For some, the physical pain and emotional stress are severe enough to affect their daily lives. Regardless of symptom severity, the signs and symptoms generally disappear within four days after the start of the menstrual period for most women.
But a small number of women with premenstrual syndrome have disabling symptoms every month. This form of PMS is called premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD).
PMDD signs and symptoms include depression, mood swings, anger, anxiety, feeling overwhelmed, difficulty concentrating, irritability and tension.
If you haven't been able to manage your premenstrual syndrome with lifestyle changes and the symptoms of PMS are affecting your health and daily activities, see your doctor.
Exactly what causes premenstrual syndrome is unknown, but several factors may contribute to the condition:
Cyclic changes in hormones. Signs and symptoms of premenstrual syndrome change with hormonal fluctuations and disappear with pregnancy and menopause.
Chemical changes in the brain. Fluctuations of serotonin, a brain chemical (neurotransmitter) that's thought to play a crucial role in mood states, could trigger PMS symptoms. Insufficient amounts of serotonin may contribute to premenstrual depression, as well as to fatigue, food cravings and sleep problems.
Depression. Some women with severe premenstrual syndrome have undiagnosed depression, though depression alone does not cause all of the symptoms
Presbyopia develops gradually. You may first notice these signs and symptoms after age 40: A tendency to hold reading material farther away to make the letters clearer, Blurred vision at normal reading distance, Eyestrain or headaches after reading or doing close-up work.
You may notice these symptoms are worse if you are tired or are in an area with dim lighting.
See an eye doctor if blurry close-up vision is keeping you from reading, doing close-up work or enjoying other normal activities. He or she can determine whether you have presbyopia and advise you of your options.
Seek immediate medical care if you: Have a sudden loss of vision in one eye with or without eye pain, Experience sudden hazy or blurred vision, See flashes of light, black spots or halos around lights, Have double vision.
To form an image, your eye relies on the cornea and the lens to focus the light reflected from objects. The closer the object, the more the lens flexes.
The cornea is the clear, dome-shaped front surface of your eye.
The lens is a clear structure about the size and shape of an M&M's candy.
Both of these structures bend (refract) light entering your eye to focus the image on the retina, located on the inside back wall of your eye.
The lens, unlike the cornea, is somewhat flexible and can change shape with the help of a circular muscle that surrounds it. When you look at something at a distance, the circular muscle relaxes. When you look at something nearby, the muscle constricts, allowing the relatively elastic lens to curve and change its focusing power.
Presbyopia is caused by a hardening of the lens of your eye, which occurs with aging. As your lens becomes less flexible, it can no longer change shape to focus on close-up images. As a result, these images appear out of focus.
Certain factors can make you more likely to develop presbyopia, including:
Age. Age is the greatest risk factor for presbyopia. Almost everyone experiences some degree of presbyopia after age 40.
Other medical conditions. Being farsighted or having certain diseases — such as diabetes, multiple sclerosis or cardiovascular diseases — can increase your risk of premature presbyopia, which is presbyopia in people younger than 40.
Drugs. Certain drugs are associated with premature presbyopic symptoms, including antidepressants, antihistamines and diuretics.
Signs and symptoms of prescription drug abuse depend on the specific drug. Because of their mind-altering properties, the most commonly abused prescription drugs are: Opioids used to treat pain, for example medications containing oxycodone — such as Oxycontin and Percocet — and those containing hydrocodone — such as Norco, Anti-anxiety medications and sedatives, such as alprazolam (Xanax) and diazepam (Valium), and hypnotics, such as zolpidem (Ambien), used to treat anxiety and sleep disorders, Stimulants, such as methylphenidate (Ritalin, Concerta, others), dextroamphetamine and amphetamine (Adderall XR, Mydayis), and dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine), used to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and certain sleep disorders.
Other signs include: Stealing, forging or selling prescriptions, Taking higher doses than prescribed, Excessive mood swings or hostility, Increase or decrease in sleep, Poor decision-making, Appearing to be high, unusually energetic or revved up, or sedated, Requesting early refills or continually "losing" prescriptions, so more prescriptions must be written, Seeking prescriptions from more than one doctor.
Talk with your doctor if you think you may have a problem with prescription drug use. You may feel embarrassed to talk about it — but remember that medical professionals are trained to help you, not judge you. It's easier to tackle the problem early before it becomes an addiction and leads to more-serious problems.
Teens and adults abuse prescription drugs for many reasons, such as: To feel good or get high, To relax or relieve tension, To reduce appetite or increase alertness, To experiment with the mental effects of the substance, To maintain an addiction and prevent withdrawal, To be accepted by peers or to be social, To try to improve concentration and academic or work performance.
Some people fear that they may become addicted to medications prescribed for medical conditions, such as painkillers prescribed after surgery. But you can reduce your risk by carefully following your doctor's instructions on how to take your medication.
Prescription drug abuse can happen at any age, but commonly begins in teens or young adults.
Risk factors for prescription drug abuse include: Past or present addictions to other substances, including alcohol and tobacco, Family history of substance abuse problems, Certain pre-existing psychiatric conditions, Exposure to peer pressure or a social environment where there's drug use, Easier access to prescription drugs, such as having prescription medications in the home medicine cabinet, Lack of knowledge about prescription drugs and their potential harm.
Prescription drug abuse in older adults is a growing problem, especially when they combine drugs with alcohol. Having multiple health problems and taking multiple drugs can put seniors at risk of misusing drugs or becoming addicted.
Abusing prescription drugs can cause a number of problems. Prescription drugs can be especially dangerous — and even lead to death — when taken in high doses, when combined with other prescription drugs or certain over-the-counter medications, or when taken with alcohol or illegal or recreational drugs.
Here are examples of serious consequences of prescription drug abuse:
Opioids can cause low blood pressure, a slowed breathing rate and potential for breathing to stop, or a coma. Overdose has a significant risk of death.
Anti-anxiety medications and sedatives can cause memory problems, low blood pressure and slowed breathing. Overdose can cause coma or death. Abruptly stopping the medication may cause withdrawal symptoms that can include nervous system hyperactivity and seizures.
Stimulants can cause dangerously high body temperature, heart problems, high blood pressure, seizures or tremors, hallucinations, aggressiveness, and paranoia.
Because commonly abused prescription drugs activate the brain's reward center, it's possible to develop physical dependence and addiction.
Physical dependence. Physical dependence (also called tolerance) is the body's response to long-term use. People who are physically dependent on a drug may need higher doses to get the same effects and may experience withdrawal symptoms when cutting back or abruptly stopping the drug. Physical dependence may also become evident if a drug the body becomes adjusted to over time, even without dosage change, is stopped abruptly.
Addiction. People who are addicted to a drug can have physical dependence, but they also compulsively seek a drug and continue to use it even when that drug causes significant problems in their lives.
Other potential consequences include: Engaging in risky behaviors because of poor judgment, Using illegal or recreational drugs, Being involved in crime, Motor vehicle accidents, Decreased academic or work performance, Troubled relationships.
Signs and symptoms of preterm labor include: Regular or frequent sensations of abdominal tightening (contractions), Constant low, dull backache, A sensation of pelvic or lower abdominal pressure, Mild abdominal cramps, Vaginal spotting or light bleeding, Preterm rupture of membranes — in a gush or a continuous trickle of fluid after the membrane around the baby breaks or tears, A change in type of vaginal discharge — watery, mucus-like or bloody.
If you experience these signs or symptoms or you're concerned about what you're feeling, contact your health care provider right away. Don't worry about mistaking false labor for the real thing. Everyone will be pleased if it's a false alarm.
Preterm labor can affect any pregnancy. Many factors have been associated with an increased risk of preterm labor, however, including: Previous preterm labor or premature birth, particularly in the most recent pregnancy or in more than one previous pregnancy, Pregnancy with twins, triplets or other multiples, Shortened cervix, Problems with the uterus or placenta, Smoking cigarettes or using illicit drugs, Certain infections, particularly of the amniotic fluid and lower genital tract, Some chronic conditions, such as high blood pressure, diabetes, autoimmune disease and depression, Stressful life events, such as the death of a loved one, Too much amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios), Vaginal bleeding during pregnancy, Presence of a fetal birth defect, An interval of less than 12 months — or of more than 59 months — between pregnancies, Age of mother, both young and older, Black, non-Hispanic race and ethnicity.
Complications of preterm labor include delivering a preterm baby. This can pose a number of health concerns for your baby, such as low birth weight, breathing difficulties, underdeveloped organs and vision problems. Children who are born prematurely also have a higher risk of cerebral palsy, learning disabilities and behavioral problems.
Priapism symptoms vary depending on the type of priapism. The two main types of priapism are ischemic and nonischemic priapism.
Ischemic priapism, also called low-flow priapism, is the result of blood not being able to leave the penis. It's the more common type of priapism. Signs and symptoms include: Erection lasting more than four hours or unrelated to sexual interest or stimulation, Rigid penile shaft, but the tip of penis (glans) is soft, Progressive penile pain.
Recurrent or stuttering priapism, a form of ischemic priapism, is an uncommon condition. It's more common in males who have an inherited disorder characterized by abnormally shaped red blood cells (sickle cell anemia). Sickle cells can block the blood vessels in the penis. Recurrent priapism describes repetitive episodes of prolonged erections and often includes episodes of ischemic priapism. In some cases, the condition starts off with unwanted and painful erections of short duration and might progress over time to more frequent and more prolonged erections.
Nonischemic priapism, also known as high-flow priapism, occurs when penile blood flow isn't regulated appropriately. Nonischemic priapism is usually less painful than ischemic priapism. Signs and symptoms include: Erection lasting more than four hours or unrelated to sexual interest or stimulation, Erect but not fully rigid penile shaft.
If you have an erection lasting more than four hours, you need emergency care. The emergency room doctor will determine whether you have ischemic priapism or nonischemic priapism. This is necessary because the treatment for each is different, and treatment for ischemic priapism needs to be done as soon as possible.
If you experience recurrent, persistent, painful erections that resolve on their own, see your doctor. You might need treatment to prevent further episodes.
An erection normally occurs in response to physical or psychological stimulation. This stimulation causes certain smooth muscles to relax, increasing blood flow to spongy tissues in the penis. Consequently, the blood-filled penis becomes erect. After stimulation ends, the blood flows out and the penis returns to its nonrigid (flaccid) state.
Priapism occurs when some part of this system — the blood, blood vessels, smooth muscles or nerves — changes normal blood flow, and an erection persists. The underlying cause of priapism often can't be determined, but several conditions may play a role.
Blood-related diseases might contribute to priapism — usually ischemic priapism, when blood isn't able to flow out of the penis. These disorders include: Sickle cell anemia, Leukemia, Other hematologic dyscrasias, such as thalassemia, multiple myeloma and others.
The most common associated diagnosis in children is sickle cell anemia.
Priapism, usually ischemic priapism, is a possible side effect of a number of drugs, including: Medications injected directly into the penis to treat erectile dysfunction, such as alprostadil, papaverine, phentolamine and others, Antidepressants, such as fluoxetine (Prozac), bupropion (Wellbutrin), and sertraline, Alpha blockers including prazosin, terazosin, doxazosin and tamsulosin, Medications used to treat anxiety or psychotic disorders, such as hydroxyzine, risperidone (Risperdal), olanzapine (Zyprexa), lithium, clozapine, chlorpromazine and thioridazine, Blood thinners, such as warfarin (Coumadin) and heparin, Hormones such as testosterone or gonadotropin-releasing hormone, Medications used to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), such as atomoxetine (Strattera).
Alcohol, marijuana, cocaine and other illicit drug abuse can cause priapism, particularly ischemic priapism.
A common cause of nonischemic priapism — a persistent erection caused by excessive blood flow into the penis — is trauma or injury to your penis, pelvis or perineum, the region between the base of the penis and the anus.
Other causes of priapism include: A spider bite, scorpion sting or other toxic infections, Metabolic disorders including gout or amyloidosis, Neurogenic disorders, such as a spinal cord injury or syphilis, Cancers involving the penis.
Ischemic priapism can cause serious complications. The blood trapped in the penis is deprived of oxygen. When an erection lasts for too long, this oxygen-poor blood can begin to damage or destroy tissues in the penis. As a result, untreated priapism can cause erectile dysfunction.
Primary aldosteronism often doesn't cause clear symptoms. The first clue that you may have primary aldosteronism is usually high blood pressure, especially hard to control blood pressure.
Sometimes, primary aldosteronism causes low potassium levels. If this happens, you may have: Muscle cramps, Weakness, Fatigue, Headache, Excessive thirst, A frequent need to urinate.
Ask your doctor about the possibility of having primary aldosteronism if you have: Moderate to severe high blood pressure, especially if you need many medications to control your blood pressure, High blood pressure and a family history of primary aldosteronism, High blood pressure and a family history of high blood pressure or stroke at age 40 or younger, High blood pressure and a growth on one of your adrenal glands (found in an imaging test done for another reason), High blood pressure and a low potassium level, High blood pressure and obstructive sleep apnea.
Common conditions that can cause too much aldosterone include: A benign growth in an adrenal gland, Overactivity of both adrenal glands.
There are other, much rarer causes of primary aldosteronism, including: A cancerous growth on the outer layer of the adrenal gland, An inherited condition that causes high blood pressure in children and young adults.
Primary aldosteronism can lead to high blood pressure and low potassium levels. These complications in turn can lead to other problems.
Persistently elevated blood pressure can lead to problems with your heart and kidneys, including: Heart attack, heart failure and other heart problems, Stroke, Kidney disease or kidney failure.
People with primary aldosteronism have a higher than expected risk of cardiovascular problems compared with people who only have high blood pressure.
Primary aldosteronism may cause low potassium levels. If your potassium levels are just slightly low, you may not have any symptoms. Very low levels of potassium can lead to: Weakness, Irregular heart rhythm, Muscle cramps, Excess thirst or urination.
More than half the people with primary biliary cholangitis do not have any noticeable symptoms when diagnosed. The disease may be diagnosed when blood tests are done for other reasons. Symptoms eventually develop over the next five to 20 years. Those who do have symptoms at diagnosis typically have poorer outcomes.
Common early symptoms include: Fatigue, Itchy skin, Dry eyes and mouth.
Later signs and symptoms may include: Pain in the upper right abdomen, Swelling of the spleen, Bone, muscle or joint (musculoskeletal) pain, Swollen feet and ankles (edema), Buildup of fluid in the abdomen due to liver failure (ascites), Fatty deposits (xanthomas) on the skin around the eyes, eyelids or in the creases of the palms, soles, elbows or knees, Yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice), Darkening of the skin that's not related to sun exposure (hyperpigmentation), Weak and brittle bones (osteoporosis), which can lead to fractures, High cholesterol, Diarrhea, which may include greasy stools (steatorrhea), Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), Weight loss.
It's not clear what causes primary biliary cholangitis. Many experts consider it an autoimmune disease in which the body turns against its own cells.
The liver inflammation seen in primary biliary cholangitis starts when certain types of white blood cells called T cells (T lymphocytes) start to collect in the liver. Normally, these immune cells detect and help defend against germs, such as bacteria. But in primary biliary cholangitis, they mistakenly destroy the healthy cells lining the small bile ducts in the liver.
Inflammation in the smallest ducts spreads and eventually damages other cells in the liver. As the cells die, they're replaced by scar tissue (fibrosis) that can lead to cirrhosis. Cirrhosis is scarring of liver tissue that makes it difficult for your liver to work properly.
The following factors may increase your risk of primary biliary cholangitis:
Sex. Most people with primary biliary cholangitis are women.
Age. It's most likely to occur in people 30 to 60 years old.
Genetic factors. You're more likely to get the condition if you have a family member who has or had it.
Geography. It's most common in northern Europe and North America.
Researchers think that genetic factors combined with certain environmental factors trigger primary biliary cholangitis. These environmental factors may include: Infections caused by bacteria, fungi or parasites, Smoking, Toxic chemicals.
As liver damage worsens, primary biliary cholangitis can cause serious health problems, including:
Liver scarring (cirrhosis). Cirrhosis makes it difficult for your liver to work and may lead to liver failure. It indicates the later stage of primary biliary cholangitis. People with primary biliary cholangitis and cirrhosis have a poor prognosis and higher risk of other complications.
Increased pressure in the portal vein (portal hypertension). Blood from your intestine, spleen and pancreas enters your liver through a large blood vessel called the portal vein. When scar tissue from cirrhosis blocks normal blood flow through your liver, blood backs up. This causes increased pressure inside the vein. Also, because blood doesn't flow normally through your liver, drugs and other toxins aren't filtered properly from your bloodstream.
Enlarged spleen (splenomegaly). Your spleen can become swollen with white blood cells and platelets because your body no longer filters toxins out of the bloodstream as it should.
Gallstones and bile duct stones. If bile cannot flow through the bile ducts, it may harden into stones, causing pain and infection.
Enlarged veins (varices). When blood flow through the portal vein is slowed or blocked, blood may back up into other — usually those in your stomach and esophagus. Increased pressure may cause delicate veins to break open and bleed. Bleeding in the upper stomach or esophagus is a life-threatening emergency that requires immediate medical care.
Liver cancer. Liver scarring (cirrhosis) increases your risk of liver cancer.
Weak bones (osteoporosis). People with primary biliary cholangitis have an increased risk of weak, brittle bones that may break more easily.
Vitamin deficiencies. A lack of bile affects your digestive system's ability to absorb fats and the fat-soluble vitamins, A, D, E and K. Because of this, some people with advanced primary biliary may have low levels of these vitamins.
Decreased mental function (hepatic encephalopathy). Some people with primary biliary cholangitis with liver failure have personality changes and problems with memory and concentration.
Increased risk of other disease. Primary biliary cholangitis is associated with metabolic or immune system disorders, including thyroid problems, limited scleroderma (CREST syndrome) and rheumatoid arthritis.
One of the most common signs of primary immunodeficiency is having infections that are more frequent, longer lasting or harder to treat than are the infections of someone with a normal immune system. You may also get infections that a person with a healthy immune system likely wouldn't get (opportunistic infections).
Signs and symptoms differ depending on the type of primary immunodeficiency disorder, and they vary from person to person.
Signs and symptoms of primary immunodeficiency can include: Frequent and recurrent pneumonia, bronchitis, sinus infections, ear infections, meningitis or skin infections, Inflammation and infection of internal organs, Blood disorders, such as low platelet counts or anemia, Digestive problems, such as cramping, loss of appetite, nausea and diarrhea, Delayed growth and development, Autoimmune disorders, such as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis or type 1 diabetes.
If your child or you have frequent, recurrent or severe infections or infections that don't respond to treatments, talk to your doctor. Early diagnosis and treatment of primary immune deficiencies can prevent infections that can cause long-term problems.
Many primary immunodeficiency disorders are inherited — passed down from one or both parents. Problems in the genetic code that acts as a blueprint for producing the cells of the body (DNA) cause many of the immune system defects.
There are more than 300 types of primary immunodeficiency disorders, and researchers continue to identify more. They can be broadly classified into six groups based on the part of the immune system that's affected: B cell (antibody) deficiencies, T cell deficiencies, Combination B and T cell deficiencies, Defective phagocytes, Complement deficiencies, Unknown (idiopathic).
The only known risk factor is having a family history of a primary immune deficiency disorder, which increases your risk of having the condition.
If you have a type of primary immune deficiency disorder, you might want to seek genetic counseling if you plan to have a family.
Complications caused by a primary immunodeficiency disorder vary, depending on what type you have. They can include: Recurrent infections, Autoimmune disorders, Damage to heart, lungs, nervous system or digestive tract, Slowed growth, Increased risk of cancer, Death from serious infection.
Signs and symptoms of primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) usually take years to progress. They include: Stiffness, weakness and muscle spasms (spasticity) in your legs, often starting in one leg, Tripping, difficulty with balance and clumsiness as the leg muscles weaken, Weakness and stiffness progressing to your trunk, then your arms, hands, tongue and jaw, Hoarseness, as well as slowed, slurred speech and drooling as the facial muscles weaken, Difficulties with swallowing and occasionally breathing late in the disease.
Less commonly, PLS begins in your tongue or hands and then progresses down your spinal cord to your legs.
Make an appointment to see your doctor if you have persistent problems with stiffness or weakness in your legs, or with swallowing or speaking.
If your child develops involuntary muscle spasms or seems to be losing balance more often than usual, make an appointment with a pediatrician for an evaluation.
In primary lateral sclerosis (PLS), the nerve cells in the brain that control movement fail over time. This loss causes movement problems, such as slow movements, balance problems and clumsiness.
The cause of adult primary lateral sclerosis is unknown. In most cases, it's not an inherited disease, and it's not known why or how it begins.
Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is caused by mutations in a gene called ALS2.
Although researchers don't understand how this gene causes the disease, they know that the ALS2 gene gives instructions for creating a protein called alsin, which is present in motor neuron cells.
When the instructions are changed in someone with juvenile PLS, the protein alsin becomes unstable and doesn't work properly, which in turn impairs normal muscle function.
Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis is an autosomal recessive disease, meaning that both parents have to be carriers of the gene to pass it to their child, even though they don't have the disease themselves.
Although the average progression of primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) lasts around 20 years, the disease has highly variable effects from person to person. Some people continue to walk, but others eventually need to use wheelchairs or other assistive devices.
Adult PLS isn't thought to shorten life expectancy, but it can gradually affect the quality of your life as more muscles become disabled. Weaker muscles can cause you to fall, which can result in injuries.
Signs and symptoms of primary ovarian insufficiency are similar to those of menopause or estrogen deficiency. They include: Irregular or skipped periods, which might be present for years or develop after a pregnancy or after stopping birth control pills, Difficulty getting pregnant, Hot flashes, Night sweats, Vaginal dryness, Dry eyes, Irritability or difficulty concentrating, Decreased sexual desire.
If you've missed your period for three months or more, see your doctor to determine the cause. You can miss your period for a number of reasons — including pregnancy, stress, or a change in diet or exercise habits — but it's best to get evaluated whenever your menstrual cycle changes.
Even if you don't mind not having periods, it's advisable to see your doctor to find out what's causing the change. Low estrogen levels can lead to bone loss and an increased risk of heart disease.
Primary ovarian insufficiency may be caused by:
Chromosomal defects. Some genetic disorders are associated with primary ovarian insufficiency. These include mosaic Turner syndrome — in which a woman has only one normal X chromosome and an altered second X chromosome — and fragile X syndrome — in which the X chromosomes are fragile and break.
Toxins. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy are common causes of toxin-induced ovarian failure. These therapies can damage genetic material in cells. Other toxins such as cigarette smoke, chemicals, pesticides and viruses might hasten ovarian failure.
An immune system response to ovarian tissue (autoimmune disease). In this rare form, your immune system produces antibodies against your ovarian tissue, harming the egg-containing follicles and damaging the egg. What triggers the immune response is unclear, but exposure to a virus is one possibility.
Unknown factors. The cause of primary ovarian insufficiency is often unknown (idiopathic). Your doctor might recommend further testing to find the cause, but in many cases, the cause remains unclear.
Factors that increase your risk of developing primary ovarian insufficiency include:
Age. The risk goes up between ages 35 and 40. Although rare before age 30, primary ovarian insufficiency is possible in younger women and even in teens.
Family history. Having a family history of primary ovarian insufficiency increases your risk of developing this disorder.
Ovarian surgery. Surgeries involving the ovaries increase the risk of primary ovarian insufficiency.
Complications of primary ovarian insufficiency include:
Infertility. Inability to get pregnant can be a complication of primary ovarian insufficiency. In rare cases, pregnancy is possible until the eggs are depleted.
Osteoporosis. The hormone estrogen helps maintain strong bones. Women with low levels of estrogen have an increased risk of developing weak and brittle bones (osteoporosis), which are more likely to break than healthy bones.
Depression or anxiety. The risk of infertility and other complications arising from low estrogen levels causes some women to become depressed or anxious.
Heart disease. Early loss of estrogen might increase your risk.
Primary progressive aphasia symptoms vary, depending on which portion of the brain's language areas are involved. The condition has three types, which cause different symptoms.
Signs and symptoms include: Difficulty comprehending spoken or written language, particularly single words, Trouble comprehending word meanings, Struggling to name objects.
Signs and symptoms include: Difficulty retrieving words and word substitutions, Frequently pausing in speech while searching for words, Difficulty repeating phrases or sentences.
Signs and symptoms include: Poor grammar in written and spoken form, Trouble understanding complex sentences, Using grammar incorrectly, May be accompanied by speaking problems such as errors in speech sounds (known as apraxia of speech).
Primary progressive aphasia is caused by a shrinking (atrophy) of certain sections (lobes) of the brain responsible for speech and language. In this case, the frontal, temporal or parietal lobes, primarily on the left side of the brain, are affected.
Atrophy is associated with the presence of abnormal proteins, and brain activity or function in affected areas might be reduced.
Risk factors for primary progressive aphasia include:
Learning disabilities. If you had a childhood learning disability, particularly developmental dyslexia, you might be at somewhat higher risk of primary progressive aphasia.
Certain gene mutations. Rare gene mutations have been linked to the disorder. If other members of your family have had primary progressive aphasia, you might be more likely to develop it.
People with primary progressive aphasia eventually lose the ability to speak and write, and to understand written and spoken language. Some people develop substantial difficulty forming sounds to speak (a problem called apraxia of speech), even when their ability to write and comprehend are not significantly impaired.
As the disease progresses, other mental skills, such as memory, can become impaired. Some people develop other neurological symptoms such as problems with movement. With these complications, the affected person eventually will need help with day-to-day care.
People with primary progressive aphasia can also develop depression or behavioral or social problems as the disease progresses. Other problems might include blunted emotions such as unconcern, poor judgment or inappropriate social behavior.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis is often diagnosed before symptoms appear when a routine blood test or an X-ray taken for an unrelated condition shows liver abnormalities.
Early symptoms often include: Fatigue, Itching.
Many people diagnosed with primary sclerosing cholangitis before they have symptoms continue to feel generally well for several years. But there's no reliable way to predict how quickly or slowly the disease will progress for any individual.
Signs and symptoms that may appear as the disease progresses include: Pain in the upper right part of the abdomen, Fever, Chills, Night sweats, Enlarged liver, Enlarged spleen, Weight loss, Yellow eyes and skin (jaundice).
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have severe, unexplained itching on much of your body — itching that persists no matter how much you scratch. Also see your doctor if you feel extremely tired all the time, no matter what you do.
It's particularly important to bring unexplained fatigue and itching to your doctor's attention if you have ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, both of which are types of inflammatory bowel disease. A majority of people with primary sclerosing cholangitis also have one of these diseases.
It's not clear what causes primary sclerosing cholangitis. An immune system reaction to an infection or toxin may trigger the disease in people who are genetically predisposed to it.
A large proportion of people with primary sclerosing cholangitis also have inflammatory bowel disease, an umbrella term that includes ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis and inflammatory bowel disease don't always appear at the same time, though. In some cases, primary sclerosing cholangitis is present for years before inflammatory bowel disease occurs. If primary sclerosing cholangitis is diagnosed, it's important to look for inflammatory bowel disease because there is a greater risk of colon cancer.
Somewhat less often, people being treated for inflammatory bowel disease turn out to have primary sclerosing cholangitis as well. And rarely, people with primary sclerosing cholangitis develop inflammatory bowel disease only after having a liver transplant.
Factors that may increase the risk of primary sclerosing cholangitis include:
Your age. Primary sclerosing cholangitis can occur at any age, but it's most often diagnosed between the ages of 30 and 50.
Your sex. Primary sclerosing cholangitis occurs more often in men.
Inflammatory bowel disease. A large proportion of people with primary sclerosing cholangitis also have inflammatory bowel disease.
Your geographical location. People with Northern European heritage have a higher risk of primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Complications of primary sclerosing cholangitis may include:
Liver disease and failure. Chronic inflammation of the bile ducts throughout your liver can lead to tissue scarring (cirrhosis), liver cell death and, eventually, loss of liver function.
Repeated infections. If scarring of the bile ducts slows or stops the flow of bile out of the liver, you may experience frequent infections in the bile ducts. The risk of infection is particularly high after you've had a surgical procedure to expand a badly scarred bile duct or remove a stone blocking a bile duct.
Portal hypertension. Your portal vein is the major route for blood flowing from your digestive system into your liver. Portal hypertension refers to high blood pressure in this vein.


Portal hypertension can cause fluid from the liver to leak into your abdominal cavity (ascites). It can also divert blood from the portal vein to other veins, causing these veins to become swollen (varices). Varices are weak veins and tend to bleed easily, which can be life-threatening.
Thinning bones. People with primary sclerosing cholangitis may experience thinning bones (osteoporosis). Your doctor may recommend a bone density exam to test for osteoporosis every few years. Calcium and vitamin D supplements may be prescribed to help prevent bone loss.
Bile duct cancer. If you have primary sclerosing cholangitis, you have an increased risk of developing cancer in the bile ducts or gallbladder.
Colon cancer. People with primary sclerosing cholangitis associated with inflammatory bowel disease have an increased risk of colon cancer. If you've been diagnosed with primary sclerosing cholangitis, your doctor may recommend testing for inflammatory bowel disease, even if you have no signs or symptoms, since the risk of colon cancer is elevated if you have both diseases.
Proctitis signs and symptoms may include: A frequent or continuous feeling that you need to have a bowel movement, Rectal bleeding, Passing mucus through your rectum, Rectal pain, Pain on the left side of your abdomen, A feeling of fullness in your rectum, Diarrhea, Pain with bowel movements.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms of proctitis.
Several diseases and conditions can cause inflammation of the rectal lining. They include:
Inflammatory bowel disease. About 30% of people with inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis) have inflammation of the rectum.
Infections. Sexually transmitted infections, spread particularly by people who engage in anal intercourse, can result in proctitis. Sexually transmitted infections that can cause proctitis include gonorrhea, genital herpes and chlamydia. Infections associated with foodborne illness, such as salmonella, shigella and campylobacter infections, also can cause proctitis.
Radiation therapy for cancer. Radiation therapy directed at your rectum or nearby areas, such as the prostate, can cause rectal inflammation. Radiation proctitis can begin during radiation treatment and last for a few months after treatment. Or it can occur years after treatment.
Antibiotics. Sometimes antibiotics used to treat an infection can kill helpful bacteria in the bowels, allowing the harmful Clostridium difficile bacteria to grow in the rectum.
Diversion proctitis. Proctitis can occur in people following some types of colon surgery in which the passage of stool is diverted from the rectum to a surgically created opening (stoma).
Food protein-induced proctitis. This can occur in infants who drink either cow's milk- or soy-based formula. Infants breast-fed by mothers who eat dairy products also may develop proctitis.
Eosinophilic proctitis. This condition occurs when a type of white blood cell (eosinophil) builds up in the lining of the rectum. Eosinophilic proctitis affects only children younger than 2.
Risk factors for proctitis include:
Unsafe sex. Practices that increase your risk of a sexually transmitted infection (STI) can increase your risk of proctitis. Your risk of contracting an STI increases if you have multiple sex partners, don't use condoms and have sex with a partner who has an STI.
Inflammatory bowel diseases. Having an inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis ) increases your risk of proctitis.
Radiation therapy for cancer. Radiation therapy directed at or near your rectum (such as for rectal, ovarian or prostate cancer) increases your risk of proctitis.
Proctitis that isn't treated or that doesn't respond to treatment may lead to complications, including:
Anemia. Chronic bleeding from your rectum can cause anemia. With anemia, you don't have enough red blood cells to carry adequate oxygen to your tissues. Anemia causes you to feel tired, and you may also experience dizziness, shortness of breath, headache, pale skin and irritability.
Ulcers. Chronic inflammation in the rectum can lead to open sores (ulcers) on the inside lining of the rectum.
Fistulas. Sometimes ulcers extend completely through the intestinal wall, creating a fistula, an abnormal connection that can occur between different parts of your intestine, between your intestine and skin, or between your intestine and other organs, such as the bladder and vagina.
Usually within the first year of life, growth of a child with progeria slows markedly, but motor development and intelligence remain normal.
Signs and symptoms of this progressive disorder include a distinctive appearance: Slowed growth, with below-average height and weight, Narrowed face, small lower jaw, thin lips and beaked nose, Head disproportionately large for the face, Prominent eyes and incomplete closure of the eyelids, Hair loss, including eyelashes and eyebrows, Thinning, spotty, wrinkled skin, Visible veins, High-pitched voice.
Signs and symptoms also include health issues: Severe progressive heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease, Hardening and tightening of skin on the trunk and extremities (similar to scleroderma), Delayed and abnormal tooth formation, Some hearing loss, Loss of fat under the skin and loss of muscle mass, Skeletal abnormalities and fragile bones, Stiff joints, Hip dislocation, Insulin resistance.
Progeria is usually detected in infancy or early childhood, often at regular checkups, when a baby first shows the characteristic signs of premature aging.
If you notice changes in your child that could be signs and symptoms of progeria, or you have any concerns about your child's growth or development, make an appointment with your child's doctor.
A single gene mutation is responsible for progeria. The gene, known as lamin A (LMNA), makes a protein necessary for holding the center (nucleus) of a cell together. When this gene has a defect (mutation), an abnormal form of the lamin A protein called progerin is produced and makes cells unstable. This appears to lead to progeria's aging process.
Unlike many genetic mutations, progeria is rarely passed down in families. The gene mutation is a rare, chance occurrence in the majority of cases.
There are other progeroid syndromes that do run in families. These inherited syndromes cause rapid aging and a shortened life span:
Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch syndrome, also known as neonatal progeroid syndrome, starts in the womb, with signs and symptoms of aging apparent at birth.
Werner syndrome, also known as adult progeria, begins in the teen years or early adulthood, causing premature aging and conditions typical of old age, such as cataracts and diabetes.
There are no known factors, such as lifestyle or environmental issues, which increase the risk of having progeria or of giving birth to a child with progeria. Progeria is extremely rare. For parents who have had one child with progeria, the chances of having a second child with progeria are about 2 to 3 percent.
Children with progeria usually develop severe hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis). This is a condition in which the walls of the arteries — blood vessels that carry nutrients and oxygen from the heart to the rest of the body — stiffen and thicken, often restricting blood flow.
Most children with progeria die of complications related to atherosclerosis, including: Problems with blood vessels that supply the heart (cardiovascular problems), resulting in heart attack and congestive heart failure, Problems with blood vessels that supply the brain (cerebrovascular problems), resulting in stroke.
Other health problems frequently associated with aging — such as arthritis, cataracts and increased cancer risk — typically do not develop as part of the course of progeria.
The characteristic signs and symptoms of progressive supranuclear palsy include:
A loss of balance while walking. A tendency to fall backward can occur very early in the disease.
An inability to aim your eyes properly. You may have particular difficulty looking downward, or experience blurring and double vision. This difficulty with focusing the eyes can make some people spill food or appear disinterested in conversation because of poor eye contact.
Additional signs and symptoms of progressive supranuclear palsy vary and may mimic those of Parkinson's disease and dementia. They generally get worse over time and may include: Stiffness and awkward movements, Falling, Problems with speech and swallowing, Sensitivity to light, Sleep disturbances, Loss of interest in pleasurable activities, Impulsive behavior, possibly including laughing or crying for no reason, Difficulties with memory, reasoning, problem-solving and decision-making, Depression and anxiety, A surprised or frightened facial expression, resulting from rigid facial muscles.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you experience any of the signs and symptoms listed above.
The cause of progressive supranuclear palsy isn't known. The signs and symptoms of the disorder result from deterioration of cells in areas of your brain, especially those that help you control body movements and thinking.
Researchers have found that the deteriorating brain cells of people with progressive supranuclear palsy have abnormal amounts of a protein called tau. Clumps of tau are also found in other neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease.
Rarely, progressive supranuclear palsy occurs within a family. But a genetic link isn't clear, and most people with progressive supranuclear palsy haven't inherited the disorder.
The only proven risk factor for progressive supranuclear palsy is age. The condition typically affects people around the age of 60 and is virtually unknown in people under the age of 40.
Complications of progressive supranuclear palsy result primarily from slow and difficult muscle movements. These complications may include: Falling, which could lead to head injuries, fractures and other injuries, Difficulty focusing your eyes, which also can lead to injuries, Difficulty sleeping, Difficulty looking at bright lights, Problems swallowing, which can lead to choking or inhaling food or liquid into your airway (aspiration), Pneumonia, which can be caused by aspiration and is the most common cause of death in people with progressive supranuclear palsy, Impulsive behaviors — for example, standing up without waiting for assistance — which can lead to falls.
To avoid the hazards of choking, your doctor may recommend a feeding tube. To avoid injuries due to falling, a walker or a wheelchair may be used.
Prolactinoma might not cause any noticeable signs or symptoms. However, excessive prolactin in your blood (hyperprolactinemia) or pressure on surrounding tissues from a large tumor can cause signs or symptoms. Because elevated prolactin can disrupt the reproductive system (hypogonadism), some of the signs and symptoms of prolactinoma are specific to females or males.
In females, prolactinoma can cause: Irregular menstrual periods or no menstrual periods, Milky discharge from the breasts when not pregnant or breast-feeding, Painful intercourse due to vaginal dryness, Acne and excessive body and facial hair growth.
In males, prolactinoma can cause: Erectile dysfunction, Decreased body and facial hair, Enlarged breasts, uncommonly.
In both sexes, prolactinoma can cause: Low bone density, Reduction of other hormone production by the pituitary gland  as a result of tumor pressure, Loss of interest in sexual activity, Headaches, Visual disturbances, Infertility.
Women tend to notice signs and symptoms earlier than men do, when tumors are smaller in size, probably because of missed or irregular menstrual periods. Men tend to notice signs and symptoms later, when tumors are larger and more likely to cause headache or vision problems.
If you develop signs and symptoms associated with prolactinoma, see your doctor to determine the cause.
Prolactinoma is one type of tumor that develops in the pituitary gland. The cause of these tumors is unknown.
The pituitary gland is a small bean-shaped gland situated at the base of your brain. Despite its small size, the pituitary gland influences nearly every part of your body. Its hormones help regulate important functions such as growth, metabolism, blood pressure and reproduction.
Other possible causes of prolactin overproduction include medications, other types of pituitary tumors, an underactive thyroid gland, ongoing irritation to the chest, pregnancy and breast-feeding.
More prolactinomas occur in women than men. The disorder is rare in children.
Complications of prolactinoma may include:
Bone loss (osteoporosis). Too much prolactin can reduce production of the hormones estrogen and testosterone, resulting in decreased bone density and an increased risk of osteoporosis.
Pregnancy complications. During a normal pregnancy, the production of estrogen increases. If you are pregnant and have a large prolactinoma, these high levels of estrogen may cause tumor growth and associated signs and symptoms, such as headaches and changes in vision.
Vision loss. Left untreated, a prolactinoma may grow large enough to compress your optic nerve. This can cause a loss of peripheral vision.
Low levels of other pituitary hormones. With larger prolactinomas, pressure on the normal pituitary gland can lead to lower levels of other hormones controlled by the pituitary, including thyroid hormones and cortisol (a stress-response hormone).
If you have prolactinoma and you want to become or are already pregnant, talk to your doctor. Adjustments in your treatment and monitoring may be necessary.
Prostate cancer may cause no signs or symptoms in its early stages.
Prostate cancer that's more advanced may cause signs and symptoms such as: Trouble urinating, Decreased force in the stream of urine, Blood in semen, Discomfort in the pelvic area, Bone pain, Erectile dysfunction.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you.
Debate continues regarding the risks and benefits of prostate cancer screening, and medical organizations differ on their recommendations. Discuss prostate cancer screening with your doctor. Together, you can decide what's best for you.
It's not clear what causes prostate cancer.
Doctors know that prostate cancer begins when some cells in your prostate become abnormal. Mutations in the abnormal cells' DNA cause the cells to grow and divide more rapidly than normal cells do. The abnormal cells continue living, when other cells would die. The accumulating abnormal cells form a tumor that can grow to invade nearby tissue. Some abnormal cells can also break off and spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.
Factors that can increase your risk of prostate cancer include:
Age. Your risk of prostate cancer increases as you age.
Race. For reasons not yet determined, black men carry a greater risk of prostate cancer than do men of other races. In black men, prostate cancer is also more likely to be aggressive or advanced.
Family history. If men in your family have had prostate cancer, your risk may be increased. Also, if you have a family history of genes that increase the risk of breast cancer (BRCA1 or BRCA2) or a very strong family history of breast cancer, your risk of prostate cancer may be higher.
Obesity. Obese men diagnosed with prostate cancer may be more likely to have advanced disease that's more difficult to treat.
Complications of prostate cancer and its treatments include:
Cancer that spreads (metastasizes). Prostate cancer can spread to nearby organs, such as your bladder, or travel through your bloodstream or lymphatic system to your bones or other organs. Prostate cancer that spreads to the bones can cause pain and broken bones. Once prostate cancer has spread to other areas of the body, it may still respond to treatment and may be controlled, but it's unlikely to be cured.
Incontinence. Both prostate cancer and its treatment can cause urinary incontinence. Treatment for incontinence depends on the type you have, how severe it is and the likelihood it will improve over time. Treatment options may include medications, catheters and surgery.
Erectile dysfunction. Erectile dysfunction can result from prostate cancer or its treatment, including surgery, radiation or hormone treatments. Medications, vacuum devices that assist in achieving erection and surgery are available to treat erectile dysfunction.
Prostatitis signs and symptoms depend on the cause. They can include: Pain or burning sensation when urinating (dysuria), Difficulty urinating, such as dribbling or hesitant urination, Frequent urination, particularly at night (nocturia), Urgent need to urinate, Cloudy urine, Blood in the urine, Pain in the abdomen, groin or lower back, Pain in the area between the scrotum and rectum (perineum), Pain or discomfort of the penis or testicles, Painful ejaculation, Flu-like signs and symptoms (with bacterial prostatitis).
If you have pelvic pain, difficult or painful urination, or painful ejaculation, see your doctor. If left untreated, some types of prostatitis can cause worsening infection or other health problems.
Acute bacterial prostatitis is often caused by common strains of bacteria. The infection can start when bacteria in urine leak into your prostate. Antibiotics are used to treat the infection. If they don't eliminate the bacteria prostatitis might recur or be difficult to treat (chronic bacterial prostatitis).
Nerve damage in the lower urinary tract, which can be caused by surgery or trauma to the area, might contribute to prostatitis not caused by a bacterial infection. In many cases of prostatitis, the cause isn't identified.
Risk factors for prostatitis include: Being young or middle-aged, Having had prostatitis previously, Having an infection in the bladder or the tube that transports semen and urine to the penis (urethra), Having pelvic trauma, such as an injury from bicycling or horseback riding, Using a tube inserted into the urethra to drain the bladder (urinary catheter), Having HIV/AIDS, Having had a prostate biopsy.
Complications of prostatitis can include: Bacterial infection of the blood (bacteremia), Inflammation of the coiled tube attached to the back of the testicle (epididymitis), Pus-filled cavity in the prostate (prostatic abscess), Semen abnormalities and infertility, which can occur with chronic prostatitis.
There's no direct evidence that prostatitis can lead to prostate cancer.
The primary sign of pseudobulbar affect (PBA) is frequent, involuntary and uncontrollable outbursts of crying or laughing that are exaggerated or not connected to your emotional state. Laughter often turns to tears. Your mood will appear normal between episodes, which can occur at any time. Crying appears to be a more common sign of PBA than laughing.
The degree of the emotional response caused by PBA is often striking, with crying or laughing lasting up to several minutes. For example, you might laugh uncontrollably in response to a mildly amusing comment. Or you might laugh or cry in situations that others don't see as funny or sad. These emotional responses typically represent a change from how you would have previously responded.
Because pseudobulbar affect often involves crying, the condition is frequently mistaken for depression. However, PBA episodes tend to be short in duration, while depression causes a persistent feeling of sadness. Also, people with PBA often lack certain features of depression, such as sleep disturbances or a loss of appetite. But depression is common among those who have pseudobulbar affect.
If you think you have PBA, talk to your doctor. If you have a neurological condition, you might already be treated by a doctor who can diagnose PBA. Helpful specialists include neuropsychologists, neurologists and psychiatrists.
It's suspected that many cases of pseudobulbar affect go unreported and undiagnosed due to a lack of awareness about the condition.
Pseudobulbar affect (PBA) typically occurs in people with neurological conditions or injuries, including: Stroke, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Multiple sclerosis (MS), Traumatic brain injury, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease.
While further research is needed, the cause of PBA is believed to involve injury to the neurological pathways that regulate the external expression of emotion (affect).
Severe symptoms of pseudobulbar affect (PBA) can cause embarrassment, social isolation, anxiety and depression. The condition might interfere with your ability to work and do daily tasks, especially when you're already coping with a neurological condition.
For most people with pseudocholinesterase deficiency, no signs or symptoms of the condition occur until they're exposed to the muscle relaxants succinylcholine or mivacurium. These drugs are used as part of anesthesia. Then signs and symptoms include muscle relaxation or muscle paralysis that lasts for several hours, with the inability to breathe on your own. The length of muscle relaxation may vary widely among people with this deficiency.
If you have a family history of pseudocholinesterase deficiency or a family member who had any problem with anesthesia, tell your doctor before you have any medical procedure that requires anesthesia.
If you have pseudocholinesterase deficiency, your body lacks or has a reduced amount of the enzyme needed to break down (metabolize) drugs known as choline esters. These drugs, succinylcholine and mivacurium, are used as part of anesthesia to relax the muscles during medical procedures.
Pseudocholinesterase deficiency causes the muscles to stay relaxed for too long, which prevents you from moving or breathing on your own for a few hours after receiving the drug. How long it takes your body to metabolize the medication depends on how much pseudocholinesterase enzyme is produced and how well it functions.
Pseudocholinesterase deficiency can be inherited or acquired.
Inherited pseudocholinesterase deficiency is caused by a defect in the butyrylcholinesterase (BCHE) gene. This gene provides the instructions to make the pseudocholinesterase enzyme that's needed to break down choline esters. This genetic defect results in a poorly functioning enzyme or lack of enzyme production.
Genetic testing can reveal whether you have this abnormal gene. To have the condition, you must inherit two abnormal genes ― one from each of your parents (autosomal recessive inheritance). If you inherit only one abnormal gene, you won't have the condition. However, you may process choline esters at a slower rate than those without an abnormal gene.
With one abnormal gene, you are a carrier and you can pass the abnormal gene to your children. But they won't develop the condition unless they also inherit an abnormal gene from the other parent.
Pseudocholinesterase deficiency can be acquired as a result of conditions that reduce production of the pseudocholinesterase enzyme, such as chronic infections, kidney or liver disease, malnutrition, severe burns, cancer, or pregnancy. Certain drugs also can reduce production of the enzyme, causing a deficiency.
Your risk of having pseudocholinesterase deficiency is higher if you or a first-degree relative, such as a parent, child or sibling, has: An abnormal gene associated with the condition, A history of an event during anesthesia that is suspected to be pseudocholinesterase deficiency.
Pseudogout most commonly affects the knees. Less often, wrists and ankles are involved. In many cases, there are no symptoms. However, during a pseudogout attack, the affected joints are usually: Swollen, Warm, Severely painful.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have sudden, intense joint pain and swelling.
Pseudogout has been linked to the presence of calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals within the affected joint. These crystals become more numerous as people age, appearing in nearly half the population older than age 85. But most people who have these crystal deposits never develop pseudogout. It's not clear why some people have symptoms and others don't.
Factors that can increase your risk of pseudogout include:
Older age. The risk of developing pseudogout increases with age.
Joint trauma. Trauma to a joint, such as a serious injury or surgery, increases your risk of pseudogout in that joint.
Genetic disorder. In some families, a predisposition for developing pseudogout is hereditary. These people tend to develop pseudogout at younger ages.
Mineral imbalances. The risk of pseudogout is higher for people who have excessive calcium or iron in their blood or too little magnesium.
Other medical conditions. Pseudogout has also been linked to an underactive thyroid gland or an overactive parathyroid gland.
The crystal deposits associated with pseudogout can also cause joint damage, which can mimic the signs and symptoms of osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis.
Signs and symptoms of pseudomembranous colitis may include: Watery diarrhea, Abdominal cramps, pain or tenderness, Fever, Pus or mucus in your stool, Nausea, Dehydration.
Symptoms of pseudomembranous colitis can begin as soon as one to two days after you start taking an antibiotic, or as long as several months or longer after you finish taking the antibiotic.
If you are currently taking or have recently taken antibiotics and you develop diarrhea, contact your doctor, even if the diarrhea is relatively mild. Also, see your doctor any time you have severe diarrhea, with a fever, painful abdominal cramps, or blood or pus in your stool.
Your body usually keeps the many bacteria in your colon in a naturally healthy balance, but antibiotics and other medications can upset this balance. Pseudomembranous colitis occurs when certain bacteria — usually C. difficile — rapidly outgrow other bacteria that normally keep them in check. Certain toxins produced by C. difficile, which are usually present in only tiny amounts, rise to levels high enough to damage the colon.
While almost any antibiotic can cause pseudomembranous colitis, some antibiotics are more commonly linked to pseudomembranous colitis than others, including: Fluoroquinolones, such as ciprofloxacin (Cipro) and levofloxacin, Penicillins, such as amoxicillin and ampicillin, Clindamycin (Cleocin), Cephalosporins, such as cefixime (Suprax).
Other medications besides antibiotics can sometimes cause pseudomembranous colitis. Chemotherapy drugs that are used to treat cancer may disrupt the normal balance of bacteria in the colon.
Certain diseases that affect the colon, such as ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, may also predispose people to pseudomembranous colitis.
C. difficile spores are resistant to many common disinfectants and can be transmitted from the hands of health care professionals to patients. Increasingly, C. difficile has been reported in people with no known risk factors, including people with no recent health care contact or use of antibiotics. This is called community-acquired C. difficile.
An aggressive strain of C. difficile has emerged that produces far more toxins than other strains do. The new strain may be more resistant to certain medications and has shown up in people who haven't been in the hospital or taken antibiotics.
Factors that may increase your risk of pseudomembranous colitis include: Taking antibiotics, Staying in the hospital or a nursing home, Increasing age, especially over 65 years, Having a weakened immune system, Having a colon disease, such as inflammatory bowel disease or colorectal cancer, Undergoing intestinal surgery, Receiving chemotherapy treatment for cancer.
Treatment of pseudomembranous colitis is usually successful. However, even with prompt diagnosis and treatment, pseudomembranous colitis can be life-threatening. Possible complications include:
Dehydration. Severe diarrhea can lead to a significant loss of fluids and electrolytes. This makes it difficult for your body to function normally and can cause blood pressure to drop to dangerously low levels.
Kidney failure. In some cases, dehydration can occur so quickly that kidney function rapidly deteriorates (kidney failure).
Toxic megacolon. In this rare condition, your colon is unable to expel gas and stool, causing it to become greatly distended (megacolon). Left untreated, your colon may rupture, causing bacteria from the colon to enter your abdominal cavity. An enlarged or ruptured colon requires emergency surgery and may be fatal.
A hole in your large intestine (bowel perforation). This is rare and results from extensive damage to the lining of your large intestine or after toxic megacolon. A perforated bowel can spill bacteria from the intestine into your abdominal cavity, leading to a life-threatening infection (peritonitis).
Death. Even mild to moderate C. difficile infections can quickly progress to a fatal disease if not treated promptly.
In addition, pseudomembranous colitis may sometimes return, days or even weeks after apparently successful treatment.
Pseudotumor cerebri signs and symptoms might include: Often severe headaches that might originate behind your eyes, A whooshing sound in your head that pulses with your heartbeat, Nausea, vomiting or dizziness, Vision loss, Brief episodes of blindness, lasting a few seconds and affecting one or both eyes, Difficulty seeing to the side, Double vision, Seeing light flashes, Neck, shoulder or back pain.
Sometimes, symptoms that have resolved can recur months or years later.
The cause of pseudotumor cerebri is unknown. If a cause is determined, the condition is called secondary intracranial hypertension, rather than idiopathic.
Your brain and spinal cord are surrounded by cerebrospinal fluid, which cushions these vital tissues from injury. This fluid is produced in the brain and eventually is absorbed into the bloodstream at a rate that usually allows the pressure in your brain to remain constant.
The increased intracranial pressure of pseudotumor cerebri might result from a problem in this absorption process.
The following factors have been associated with pseudotumor cerebri:
Obese women of childbearing age are more likely to develop the disorder.
Substances linked to secondary intracranial hypertension include: Growth hormone, Tetracycline, Too much vitamin A.
Conditions and diseases that have been linked to secondary intracranial hypertension include: Addison's disease, Anemia, Blood-clotting disorders, Kidney disease, Lupus, Polycystic ovary syndrome, Sleep apnea, Underactive parathyroid glands.
For some people with pseudotumor cerebri, their vision continues to worsen, leading to blindness.
Psoriasis signs and symptoms can vary from person to person. Common signs and symptoms include: Red patches of skin covered with thick, silvery scales, Small scaling spots (commonly seen in children), Dry, cracked skin that may bleed or itch, Itching, burning or soreness, Thickened, pitted or ridged nails, Swollen and stiff joints.
Psoriasis patches can range from a few spots of dandruff-like scaling to major eruptions that cover large areas. The most commonly affected areas are the lower back, elbows, knees, legs, soles of the feet, scalp, face and palms.
Most types of psoriasis go through cycles, flaring for a few weeks or months, then subsiding for a time or even going into remission.
There are several types of psoriasis, including:
Plaque psoriasis. The most common form, plaque psoriasis causes dry, raised, red skin patches (lesions) covered with silvery scales. The plaques might be itchy or tender, and there may be few or many. They usually appear on elbows, knees, lower back and scalp.
Nail psoriasis. Psoriasis can affect fingernails and toenails, causing pitting, abnormal nail growth and discoloration. Psoriatic nails might loosen and separate from the nail bed (onycholysis). Severe cases may cause the nail to crumble.
Guttate psoriasis. This type primarily affects young adults and children. It's usually triggered by a bacterial infection such as strep throat. It's marked by small, drop-shaped, scaling lesions on the trunk, arms or legs.
Inverse psoriasis. This mainly affects the skin folds of the groin, buttocks and breasts. Inverse psoriasis causes smooth patches of red skin that worsen with friction and sweating. Fungal infections may trigger this type of psoriasis.
Pustular psoriasis. This rare form of psoriasis causes clearly defined pus-filled lesions that occur in widespread patches (generalized pustular psoriasis) or in smaller areas on the palms of the hands or the soles of the feet.
Erythrodermic psoriasis. The least common type of psoriasis, erythrodermic psoriasis can cover your entire body with a red, peeling rash that can itch or burn intensely.
Psoriatic arthritis. Psoriatic arthritis causes swollen, painful joints that are typical of arthritis. Sometimes the joint symptoms are the first or only symptom or sign of psoriasis. And at times only nail changes are seen. Symptoms range from mild to severe, and psoriatic arthritis can affect any joint. It can cause stiffness and progressive joint damage that in the most serious cases may lead to permanent joint damage.
If you suspect that you may have psoriasis, see your doctor. Also, talk to your doctor if your psoriasis: Becomes severe or widespread, Causes you discomfort and pain, Causes you concern about the appearance of your skin, Leads to joint problems, such as pain, swelling or inability to perform daily tasks, Doesn't improve with treatment.
Psoriasis is thought to be an immune system problem that causes the skin to regenerate at faster than normal rates. In the most common type of psoriasis, known as plaque psoriasis, this rapid turnover of cells results in scales and red patches.
Just what causes the immune system to malfunction isn't entirely clear. Researchers believe both genetics and environmental factors play a role. The condition is not contagious.
Many people who are predisposed to psoriasis may be free of symptoms for years until the disease is triggered by some environmental factor. Common psoriasis triggers include: Infections, such as strep throat or skin infections, Weather, especially cold, dry conditions, Injury to the skin, such as a cut or scrape, a bug bite, or a severe sunburn, Stress, Smoking and exposure to secondhand smoke, Heavy alcohol consumption, Certain medications — including lithium, high blood pressure medications and antimalarial drugs, Rapid withdrawal of oral or systemic corticosteroids.
Anyone can develop psoriasis. About a third of instances begin in the pediatric years. These factors can increase your risk:
Family history. The condition runs in families. Having one parent with psoriasis increases your risk of getting the disease, and having two parents with psoriasis increases your risk even more.
Stress. Because stress can impact your immune system, high stress levels may increase your risk of psoriasis.
Smoking. Smoking tobacco not only increases your risk of psoriasis but also may increase the severity of the disease. Smoking may also play a role in the initial development of the disease.
If you have psoriasis, you're at greater risk of developing other conditions, including: Psoriatic arthritis, which causes pain, stiffness and swelling in and around the joints, Eye conditions, such as conjunctivitis, blepharitis and uveitis, Obesity, Type 2 diabetes, High blood pressure, Cardiovascular disease, Other autoimmune diseases, such as celiac disease, sclerosis and the inflammatory bowel disease called Crohn's disease, Mental health conditions, such as low self-esteem and depression.
Both psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis are chronic diseases that get worse over time, but you may have periods when your symptoms improve or go into remission alternating with times when symptoms become worse.
Psoriatic arthritis can affect joints on just one side or on both sides of your body. The signs and symptoms of psoriatic arthritis often resemble those of rheumatoid arthritis. Both diseases cause joints to become painful, swollen and warm to the touch.
However, psoriatic arthritis is more likely to also cause:
Swollen fingers and toes. Psoriatic arthritis can cause a painful, sausage-like swelling of your fingers and toes. You may also develop swelling and deformities in your hands and feet before having significant joint symptoms.
Foot pain. Psoriatic arthritis can also cause pain at the points where tendons and ligaments attach to your bones — especially at the back of your heel (Achilles tendinitis) or in the sole of your foot (plantar fasciitis).
Lower back pain. Some people develop a condition called spondylitis as a result of psoriatic arthritis. Spondylitis mainly causes inflammation of the joints between the vertebrae of your spine and in the joints between your spine and pelvis (sacroiliitis).
If you have psoriasis, be sure to tell your doctor if you develop joint pain. Psoriatic arthritis can severely damage your joints if left untreated.
Psoriatic arthritis occurs when your body's immune system begins to attack healthy cells and tissue. The abnormal immune response causes inflammation in your joints as well as overproduction of skin cells.
It's not entirely clear why the immune system attacks healthy tissue, but it seems likely that both genetic and environmental factors play a role. Many people with psoriatic arthritis have a family history of either psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis. Researchers have discovered certain genetic markers that appear to be associated with psoriatic arthritis.
Physical trauma or something in the environment — such as a viral or bacterial infection — may trigger psoriatic arthritis in people with an inherited tendency.
Several factors can increase your risk of psoriatic arthritis, including:
Psoriasis. Having psoriasis is the single greatest risk factor for developing psoriatic arthritis. People who have pitted, deformed nails are especially likely to develop psoriatic arthritis.
Your family history. Many people with psoriatic arthritis have a parent or a sibling with the disease.
Your age. Although anyone can develop psoriatic arthritis, it occurs most often in adults between the ages of 30 and 50.
A small percentage of people with psoriatic arthritis develop arthritis mutilans — a severe, painful and disabling form of the disease. Over time, arthritis mutilans destroys the small bones in the hands, especially the fingers, leading to permanent deformity and disability.
People who have psoriatic arthritis sometimes also develop eye problems such as pinkeye (conjunctivitis) or uveitis, which can cause painful, reddened eyes and blurred vision. They are also at higher risk of cardiovascular disease.
If you have pubic lice (crabs), you may experience intense itching in your genital region. Pubic lice can spread to other areas with coarse body hair, including the: Legs, Chest, Armpits, Beard or mustache, Eyelashes or eyebrows, more commonly in children.
Seek medical advice about pubic lice treatment if: Over-the-counter products don't kill the lice, You're pregnant, You have any infected skin abrasions from scratching.
Pubic lice are most commonly transmitted during sexual activity. You may also acquire pubic lice from contaminated sheets, blankets, towels or clothes.
People who have other sexually transmitted infections are more likely to also have pubic lice.
Pubic lice infestations can usually be treated with a louse-killing lotion or gel. However, a pubic lice infestation sometimes leads to complications such as:
Discolored skin. Pale blue spots may develop where pubic lice have been feeding continually.
Secondary infections. If itchy lice bites cause you to scratch yourself raw, these wounds can become infected.
Eye irritations. Children who have pubic lice on their eyelashes may develop a type of pink eye (conjunctivitis).
Pulmonary edema signs and symptoms may appear suddenly or develop over time. The signs and symptoms you have depends on the type of pulmonary edema. Difficulty breathing (dyspnea) or extreme shortness of breath that worsens with activity or when lying down, A feeling of suffocating or drowning that worsens when lying down, A cough that produces frothy sputum that may be tinged with blood, Wheezing or gasping for breath, Cold, clammy skin, Anxiety, restlessness or a sense of apprehension, Bluish ips, A rapid, irregular heartbeat (palpitations).
Difficulty breathing with activity or when lying flat, Awakening at night with a cough or breathless feeling that may be relieved by sitting up, More shortness of breath than normal when you're physically active, Wheezing, Rapid weight gain, Swelling in your lower extremities, Fatigue, New or worsening cough.
HAPE can occur in adults and children who travel to or exercise at high altitudes. Signs and symptoms are similar to those that occur with acute pulmonary edema and can include: Headache, which may be the first symptom, Shortness of breath with activity, which worsens to shortness of breath at rest, Decreased ability to exercise as you once could, Dry cough, at first, Later, a cough that produces frothy, pink sputum, A very fast heartbeat (tachycardia), Weakness, Chest pain, Low-grade fever.
Signs and symptoms of high-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) tend to get worse at night.
Pulmonary edema that comes on suddenly (acute pulmonary edema) is life-threatening. Call 911 or emergency medical help if you have any of the following acute signs and symptoms: Shortness of breath, especially if it comes on suddenly, Trouble breathing or a feeling of suffocating (dyspnea), A bubbly, wheezing or gasping sound when you breathe, Pink, frothy sputum when you cough, Breathing difficulty along with a lot of sweating, A blue or gray color to your skin, Confusion, A significant drop in blood pressure resulting in lightheadedness, dizziness, weakness or sweating, A sudden worsening of any of pulmonary edema symptoms.
Don't attempt to drive yourself to the hospital. Instead, call 911 or emergency medical care and wait for help.
The causes of pulmonary edema vary. Pulmonary edema is grouped into two categories, depending on where the problem started.
If a heart problem causes the pulmonary edema, it's called cardiogenic pulmonary edema. Most often, the fluid buildup in the lungs is due to a heart condition.
If pulmonary edema is not heart related, it's called noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Sometimes, pulmonary edema can be caused by both a heart problem and a non-heart problem.
Understanding the relationship between your lungs and your heart can help explain why pulmonary edema may occur.
Your lungs contain many small, elastic air sacs called alveoli. With each breath, these air sacs take in oxygen and release carbon dioxide. Normally, this exchange of gases occurs without problems.
But sometimes, the alveoli fill with fluid instead of air, preventing oxygen from being absorbed into your bloodstream.
Your heart is made of two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers (the right and left atria) receive incoming blood and pump it into the lower chambers (right and left ventricles). The lower chambers pump blood out of your heart.
Normally, deoxygenated blood from all over your body enters the right atrium then the right ventricle, where it's pumped through large blood vessels (pulmonary arteries) to your lungs. There, the blood releases carbon dioxide and picks up oxygen as it flows by the alveoli.
The oxygen-rich blood then returns to the left atrium through the pulmonary veins, flows through the mitral valve into the left ventricle and finally leaves your heart through the largest blood vessel in the body, called the aorta.
The heart valves keep blood flowing in the correct direction. The aortic valve keeps the blood from flowing backward into your heart. From the aorta, the blood travels to the rest of your body.
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema is caused by increased pressures in the heart.
It's usually a result of heart failure. When a diseased or overworked left ventricle can't pump out enough of the blood it gets from your lungs, pressures in the heart go up. The increased pressure pushes fluid through the blood vessel walls into the air sacs.
Medical conditions that can cause heart failure and lead to pulmonary edema include:
Coronary artery disease. Over time, the arteries that supply blood to your heart muscle can become narrow from fatty deposits (plaques). A slow narrowing of the coronary arteries can make the left ventricle weak. Sometimes, a blood clot forms in one of these narrowed arteries, blocking blood flow and damaging part of your heart muscle, resulting in a heart attack. A damaged heart muscle can no longer pump as well as it should.
Cardiomyopathy. This term means heart muscle damage. If you have cardiomyopathy, your heart has to pump harder, and pressures go up. The heart may be unable to respond to conditions that require it to work harder, such as exercise, infection or a rise in blood pressure. When the left ventricle can't keep up with the demands that are placed on it, fluid backs up into your lungs.
Heart valve problems. Narrowing of the aortic or mitral heart valves (stenosis) or a valve that leaks or doesn't close properly affects blood flow into the heart.  The heart has to work harder, and pressures go up. If valve leakage develops suddenly, you may develop sudden and severe pulmonary edema.
High blood pressure (hypertension). Untreated or uncontrolled high blood pressure can enlarge the heart.
Other heart problems. Inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis), congenital heart defects and abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias) also may cause pulmonary edema.
Kidney disease. High blood pressure due to narrowed kidney arteries (renal artery stenosis) or fluid buildup due to kidney disease can cause pulmonary edema.
Chronic health conditions. Thyroid disease and a buildup of iron (hemochromatosis) or protein (amyloidosis) also may contribute to heart failure and cause pulmonary edema.
Pulmonary edema that is not caused by increased pressures in your heart is called noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Causes of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema include:
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). This serious disorder occurs when your lungs suddenly fill with fluid and inflammatory white blood cells. Many conditions can cause ARDS, including severe injury (trauma), widespread infection (sepsis), pneumonia and severe bleeding.
Adverse drug reaction or drug overdose. Many drugs — ranging from aspirin to illegal drugs such as heroin and cocaine — are known to cause pulmonary edema.
Blood clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism). If a blood clot travels from the blood vessels in your legs to your lungs, you can develop pulmonary edema.
Exposure to certain toxins. Inhaling toxins or breathing in some of your stomach contents when you vomit (aspiration) causes intense irritation of the small airways and alveoli, resulting in fluid buildup.
High altitudes. Pulmonary edema has been seen in mountain climbers, skiers, hikers and other people who travel to high elevations, usually above 8,000 feet (about 2,400 meters). High-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) generally occurs in those who don't first become acclimated to the elevation (which can take from a few days to a week or so). But people who live at high altitudes can get HAPE with no elevation change if they have a respiratory infection.
Near drowning. Inhaling water causes fluid buildup in the lungs that is reversible with immediate medical care.
Negative pressure pulmonary edema. Pulmonary edema can develop after a blockage in the upper airway causes negative pressure in the lungs from intense efforts to breathe despite the blockage. With treatment, most people with this type of pulmonary edema recover in about 24 hours.
Nervous system conditions or procedures. A type of pulmonary edema called neurogenic pulmonary edema can occur after a head injury, seizure or brain surgery.
Smoke inhalation. Smoke from a fire contains chemicals that damage the membrane between the air sacs and the capillaries, allowing fluid to enter your lungs.
Transfusion-related lung injury. Blood transfusions may cause fluid overload in the left ventricle, leading to pulmonary edema.
Viral infections. Pulmonary edema can be caused by viruses such as the hantavirus and dengue virus.
Heart failure and other heart conditions that raise pressure in the heart increase the risk of pulmonary edema. Risk factors for heart failure include: Abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias), Alcohol use, Congenital heart disease, Coronary artery disease, Diabetes, Heart valve disease, High blood pressure, Sleep apnea.
However, some nervous system conditions and lung damage due to near drowning, drug use, smoke inhalation, viral infections and blood clots also raise your risk.
People who travel to high-altitude locations above 8,000 feet (about 2,400 meters) are more likely to develop high-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE). It usually affects those who do not first become acclimated to the elevation (which can take from a few days to a week or so).
Children who have existing pulmonary hypertension and structural heart defects may be more likely to get HAPE.
Complications depend on the underlying cause.
In general, if pulmonary edema continues, the pressure in the pulmonary artery can go up (pulmonary hypertension). Eventually, the heart becomes weak and begins to fail, and pressures in the heart and lungs go up.
Complications can include: Breathing difficulty, Swelling of the legs, feet and abdomen, Buildup of fluid in the membranes that surround your lungs (pleural effusion), Congestion and swelling of the liver.
Immediate treatment is necessary for acute pulmonary edema to prevent death.
Pulmonary embolism symptoms can vary greatly, depending on how much of your lung is involved, the size of the clots, and whether you have underlying lung or heart disease.
Common signs and symptoms include:
Shortness of breath. This symptom typically appears suddenly and always gets worse with exertion.
Chest pain. You may feel like you're having a heart attack. The pain is often sharp and felt when you breathe in deeply, often stopping you from being able to take a deep breath. It can also be felt when you cough, bend or stoop.
Cough. The cough may produce bloody or blood-streaked sputum.
Other signs and symptoms that can occur with pulmonary embolism include: Rapid or irregular heartbeat, Lightheadedness or dizziness, Excessive sweating, Fever, Leg pain or swelling, or both, usually in the calf caused by a deep vein thrombosis, Clammy or discolored skin (cyanosis).
Pulmonary embolism can be life-threatening. Seek urgent medical attention if you experience unexplained shortness of breath, chest pain or a cough that produces bloody sputum.
Pulmonary embolism occurs when a clump of material, most often a blood clot, gets wedged into an artery in your lungs. These blood clots most commonly come from the deep veins of your legs, a condition known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT).
In many cases, multiple clots are involved in pulmonary embolism. The portions of lung served by each blocked artery are robbed of blood and may die. This is known as pulmonary infarction. This makes it more difficult for your lungs to provide oxygen to the rest of your body.
Occasionally, blockages in the blood vessels are caused by substances other than blood clots, such as: Fat from the marrow of a broken long bone, Part of a tumor, Air bubbles.
Although anyone can develop blood clots and subsequent pulmonary embolism, certain factors can increase your risk.
You're at higher risk if you or any of your family members have had venous blood clots or pulmonary embolism in the past.
In addition, some medical conditions and treatments put you at risk, such as:
Heart disease. Cardiovascular disease, specifically heart failure, makes clot formation more likely.
Cancer. Certain cancers — especially brain, ovary, pancreas, colon, stomach, lung and kidney cancers, and cancers that have spread — can increase the risk of blood clots, and chemotherapy further increases the risk. Women with a personal or family history of breast cancer who are taking tamoxifen or raloxifene also are at higher risk of blood clots.
Surgery. Surgery is one of the leading causes of problem blood clots. For this reason, medication to prevent clots may be given before and after major surgery, such as joint replacement.
Disorders that affect clotting. Some inherited disorders affect blood, making it more prone to clot. Other medical disorders such as kidney disease can also increase your risk of blood clots.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). People who have severe symptoms of COVID-19 have an increased risk of pulmonary embolism.
Blood clots are more likely to form during periods of inactivity, such as:
Bed rest. Being confined to bed for an extended period after surgery, a heart attack, leg fracture, trauma or any serious illness makes you more vulnerable to blood clots. When the lower extremities are horizontal for long periods, the flow of venous blood slows and blood can pool in the legs, sometimes resulting in blood clots.
Long trips. Sitting in a cramped position during lengthy plane or car trips slows blood flow in the legs, which contributes to the formation of clots.
Smoking. For reasons that aren't well understood, tobacco use predisposes some people to blood clot formation, especially when combined with other risk factors.
Being overweight. Excess weight increases the risk of blood clots — particularly in people with other risk factors.
Supplemental estrogen. The estrogen in birth control pills and in hormone replacement therapy can increase clotting factors in your blood, especially if you smoke or are overweight.
Pregnancy. The weight of the baby pressing on veins in the pelvis can slow blood return from the legs. Clots are more likely to form when blood slows or pools.
Pulmonary embolism can be life-threatening. About one-third of people with undiagnosed and untreated pulmonary embolism don't survive. When the condition is diagnosed and treated promptly, however, that number drops dramatically.
Pulmonary embolism can also lead to pulmonary hypertension, a condition in which the blood pressure in your lungs and in the right side of the heart is too high. When you have obstructions in the arteries inside your lungs, your heart must work harder to push blood through those vessels, which increases blood pressure and eventually weakens your heart.
In rare cases, small emboli occur frequently and develop over time, resulting in chronic pulmonary hypertension, also known as chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension.
Signs and symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis may include: Shortness of breath (dyspnea), A dry cough, Fatigue, Unexplained weight loss, Aching muscles and joints, Widening and rounding of the tips of the fingers or toes (clubbing).
The course of pulmonary fibrosis — and the severity of symptoms — can vary considerably from person to person. Some people become ill very quickly with severe disease. Others have moderate symptoms that worsen more slowly, over months or years.
Some people may experience a rapid worsening of their symptoms (acute exacerbation), such as severe shortness of breath, that may last for several days to weeks. People who have acute exacerbations may be placed on a mechanical ventilator. Doctors may also prescribe antibiotics, corticosteroid medications or other medications to treat an acute exacerbation.
Pulmonary fibrosis scars and thickens the tissue around and between the air sacs (alveoli) in your lungs. This makes it more difficult for oxygen to pass into your bloodstream. The damage can be caused by many different factors — including long-term exposure to certain toxins, certain medical conditions, radiation therapy and some medications.
Long-term exposure to a number of toxins and pollutants can damage your lungs. These include: Silica dust, Asbestos fibers, Hard metal dusts, Coal dust, Grain dust, Bird and animal droppings.
Some people who receive radiation therapy for lung or breast cancer show signs of lung damage months or sometimes years after the initial treatment. The severity of the damage may depend on: How much of the lung was exposed to radiation, The total amount of radiation administered, Whether chemotherapy also was used, The presence of underlying lung disease.
Many drugs can damage your lungs, especially medications such as:
Chemotherapy drugs. Drugs designed to kill cancer cells, such as methotrexate (Trexall, Otrexup, others) and cyclophosphamide, can also damage lung tissue.
Heart medications. Some drugs used to treat irregular heartbeats, such as amiodarone (Cordarone, Nexterone, Pacerone), may harm lung tissue.
Some antibiotics. Antibiotics such as nitrofurantoin (Macrobid, Macrodantin, others) or ethambutol can cause lung damage.
Anti-inflammatory drugs. Certain anti-inflammatory drugs such as rituximab (Rituxan) or sulfasalazine (Azulfidine) can cause lung damage.
Lung damage can also result from a number of conditions, including: Dermatomyositis, Polymyositis, Mixed connective tissue disease, Systemic lupus erythematosus, Rheumatoid arthritis, Sarcoidosis, Scleroderma, Pneumonia.
Many substances and conditions can lead to pulmonary fibrosis. Even so, in most cases, the cause is never found. Pulmonary fibrosis with no known cause is called idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Researchers have several theories about what might trigger idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, including viruses and exposure to tobacco smoke. Also, some forms of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis run in families, and heredity may play a role in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Many people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis may also have gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) — a condition that occurs when acid from your stomach flows back into your esophagus. Ongoing research is evaluating if GERD may be a risk factor for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, or if GERD may lead to a more rapid progression of the condition. However, more research is needed to determine the association between idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and GERD.
Factors that make you more susceptible to pulmonary fibrosis include:
Age. Although pulmonary fibrosis has been diagnosed in children and infants, the disorder is much more likely to affect middle-aged and older adults.
Sex. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is more likely to affect men than women.
Smoking. Far more smokers and former smokers develop pulmonary fibrosis than do people who have never smoked. Pulmonary fibrosis can occur in patients with emphysema.
Certain occupations. You have an increased risk of developing pulmonary fibrosis if you work in mining, farming or construction or if you're exposed to pollutants known to damage your lungs.
Cancer treatments. Having radiation treatments to your chest or using certain chemotherapy drugs can increase your risk of pulmonary fibrosis.
Genetic factors. Some types of pulmonary fibrosis run in families, and genetic factors may be a component.
Complications of pulmonary fibrosis may include:
High blood pressure in your lungs (pulmonary hypertension). Unlike systemic high blood pressure, this condition affects only the arteries in your lungs. It begins when the smallest arteries and capillaries are compressed by scar tissue, causing increased resistance to blood flow in your lungs.
This in turn raises pressure within the pulmonary arteries and the lower right heart chamber (right ventricle). Some forms of pulmonary hypertension are serious illnesses that become progressively worse and are sometimes fatal.
Right-sided heart failure (cor pulmonale). This serious condition occurs when your heart's lower right chamber (ventricle) has to pump harder than usual to move blood through partially blocked pulmonary arteries.
Respiratory failure. This is often the last stage of chronic lung disease. It occurs when blood oxygen levels fall dangerously low.
Lung cancer. Long-standing pulmonary fibrosis also increases your risk of developing lung cancer.
Lung complications. As pulmonary fibrosis progresses, it may lead to complications such as blood clots in the lungs, a collapsed lung or lung infections.
The signs and symptoms of pulmonary hypertension develop slowly. You may not notice them for months or even years. Symptoms get worse as the disease progresses.
Pulmonary hypertension symptoms include: Shortness of breath (dyspnea), initially while exercising and eventually while at rest, Fatigue, Dizziness or fainting spells (syncope), Chest pressure or pain, Swelling (edema) in your ankles, legs and eventually in your abdomen (ascites), Bluish color to your lips and skin (cyanosis), Racing pulse or heart palpitations.
Your heart has two upper chambers (atria) and two lower chambers (ventricles). Each time blood passes through your heart, the lower right chamber (right ventricle) pumps blood to your lungs through a large blood vessel (pulmonary artery).
In your lungs, the blood releases carbon dioxide and picks up oxygen. The blood normally flows easily through blood vessels in your lungs (pulmonary arteries, capillaries and veins) to the left side of your heart.
However, changes in the cells that line your pulmonary arteries can cause the walls of the arteries to become stiff, swollen and thick. These changes may slow down or block blood flow through the lungs, causing pulmonary hypertension.
Pulmonary hypertension is classified into five groups, depending on the cause.
Causes include: Unknown cause (idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension), A genetic mutation passed down through families (heritable pulmonary arterial hypertension), Use of some prescription diet drugs or illegal drugs such as methamphetamines — and other drugs, Heart problems present at birth (congenital heart disease), Other conditions, such as connective tissue disorders (scleroderma, lupus, others), HIV infection or chronic liver disease (cirrhosis).
Causes include: Left-sided heart valve disease, such as mitral valve or aortic valve disease, Failure of the lower left heart chamber (left ventricle).
Causes include: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), Pulmonary fibrosis, a condition that causes scarring in the tissue between the lungs' air sacs (interstitium), Obstructive sleep apnea, Long-term exposure to high altitudes in people who may be at higher risk of pulmonary hypertension.
Causes include: Chronic blood clots in the lungs (pulmonary emboli), Other clotting disorders.
Causes include: Blood disorders, including polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia, Inflammatory disorders such as sarcoidosis and vasculitis, Metabolic disorders, including glycogen storage disease, Kidney disease, Tumors pressing against pulmonary arteries.
Eisenmenger syndrome is a type of congenital heart disease that causes pulmonary hypertension. It's most commonly caused by a large hole in your heart between the two lower heart chambers (ventricles), called a ventricular septal defect.
This hole in your heart causes blood to flow incorrectly in your heart. Oxygen-carrying blood (red blood) mixes with oxygen-poor blood (blue blood). The blood then returns to your lungs — instead of going to the rest of your body — increasing the pressure in the pulmonary arteries and causing pulmonary hypertension.
Growing older can increase your risk of developing pulmonary hypertension. The condition is more often diagnosed in people ages 30 to 60. However, idiopathic PAH is more common in younger adults.
Other things that can raise your risk of pulmonary hypertension include: A family history of the condition, Being overweight, Blood-clotting disorders or a family history of blood clots in the lungs, Exposure to asbestos, Genetic disorders, including congenital heart disease, Living at a high altitude, Use of certain weight-loss drugs, Use of illegal drugs such as cocaine, Use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), used to treat depression and anxiety.
Complications of pulmonary hypertension include:
Right-sided heart enlargement and heart failure (cor pulmonale). In cor pulmonale, your heart's right ventricle becomes enlarged and has to pump harder than usual to move blood through narrowed or blocked pulmonary arteries.
At first, the heart tries to compensate by thickening its walls and expanding the chamber of the right ventricle to increase the amount of blood it can hold. But these changes create more strain on the heart, and eventually the right ventricle fails.
Blood clots. Having pulmonary hypertension makes it more likely you'll develop clots in the small arteries in your lungs, which is dangerous if you already have narrowed or blocked blood vessels.
Arrhythmia. Pulmonary hypertension can cause irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias), which can lead to a pounding heartbeat (palpitations), dizziness or fainting. Certain arrhythmias can be life-threatening.
Bleeding in the lungs. Pulmonary hypertension can lead to life-threatening bleeding into the lungs and coughing up blood (hemoptysis).
Pregnancy complications. Pulmonary hypertension can be life-threatening for a woman and her developing baby.
Pulmonary valve stenosis signs and symptoms vary, depending on the extent of the obstruction. People with mild pulmonary stenosis usually don't have symptoms. Those with more significant stenosis often may first notice symptoms while exercising.
Pulmonary valve stenosis signs and symptoms may include: Heart murmur — an abnormal whooshing sound heard using a stethoscope, caused by turbulent blood flow, Fatigue, Shortness of breath, especially during exertion, Chest pain, Loss of consciousness (fainting).
Talk to your doctor if you or your child has: Shortness of breath, Chest pain, Fainting.
If you have pulmonary stenosis or another heart problem, prompt evaluation and treatment can help reduce your risk of complications.
Pulmonary valve stenosis usually occurs when the pulmonary valve doesn't grow properly during fetal development. Babies who have the condition may have other congenital heart abnormalities, as well.  It's not known what causes the valve to develop abnormally.
The pulmonary valve is made up of three thin pieces of tissue called cusps that are arranged in a circle. With each heartbeat, the valve opens in the direction of blood flow — into the pulmonary artery and continuing to the lungs — then closes to prevent blood from flowing backward into the heart's right ventricle.
One or more of the cusps may be defective or too thick, or the cusps may not separate from each other properly. If this happens, the valve doesn't open correctly, restricting blood flow.
Sometimes other medical conditions or having an artificial valve can cause the condition.
Carcinoid syndrome. This syndrome — a combination of signs and symptoms, including flushing of the skin and diarrhea — results from the release of a chemical, serotonin, from growths called carcinoid tumors in the digestive system.
Rheumatic fever. This complication of an infection caused by streptococcus bacteria, such as strep throat, may injure the heart valves.
Because pulmonary valve stenosis usually develops before birth, there aren't many known risk factors. However, certain conditions and procedures can increase your risk of developing pulmonary valve stenosis later in life, including: Carcinoid syndrome, Rheumatic fever, Noonan syndrome, Pulmonary valve replacement.
Pulmonary stenosis may be associated with the following:
Infection. People with heart valve problems, such as pulmonary stenosis, have a higher risk of developing bacterial infections in the inner lining of the heart (infective endocarditis) than people without heart valve problems.
Heart-pumping problems. In severe pulmonary stenosis, the heart's right ventricle must pump harder to force blood into the pulmonary artery. Pumping of the right ventricle against increased pressure causes the muscular wall of the ventricle to thicken (right ventricular hypertrophy). Eventually, the heart becomes stiff and may weaken.
Heart failure. If the right ventricle is unable to pump efficiently, heart failure develops. This results in swelling of the legs and abdomen and can cause fatigue and shortness of breath.
Irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia). People with pulmonary stenosis are more likely to have an irregular heartbeat. Unless the stenosis is severe, irregular heartbeats associated with pulmonary stenosis usually aren't life-threatening.
Signs of pyloric stenosis usually appear within three to five weeks after birth. Pyloric stenosis is rare in babies older than 3 months.
Signs include:
Vomiting after feeding. The baby may vomit forcefully, ejecting breast milk or formula up to several feet away (projectile vomiting). Vomiting might be mild at first and gradually become more severe as the pylorus opening narrows. The vomit may sometimes contain blood.
Persistent hunger. Babies who have pyloric stenosis often want to eat soon after vomiting.
Stomach contractions. You may notice wave-like contractions (peristalsis) that ripple across your baby's upper abdomen soon after feeding but before vomiting. This is caused by stomach muscles trying to force food through the narrowed pylorus.
Dehydration Your baby might cry without tears or become lethargic. You might find yourself changing fewer wet diapers or diapers that aren't as wet as you expect.
Changes in bowel movements. Since pyloric stenosis prevents food from reaching the intestines, babies with this condition might be constipated.
Weight problems. Pyloric stenosis can keep a baby from gaining weight, and sometimes can cause weight loss.
See your baby's doctor if your baby: Projectile vomits after feeding, Seems less active or unusually irritable, Urinates much less frequently or has noticeably fewer bowel movements, Isn't gaining weight or is losing weight.
The causes of pyloric stenosis are unknown, but genetic and environmental factors might play a role. Pyloric stenosis usually isn't present at birth and probably develops afterward.
Risk factors for pyloric stenosis include:
Sex. Pyloric stenosis is seen more often in boys — especially firstborn children — than in girls.
Race. Pyloric stenosis is more common in whites of northern European ancestry, less common in African-Americans and rare in Asians.
Premature birth. Pyloric stenosis is more common in babies born prematurely than in full-term babies.
Family history. Studies found higher rates of this disorder among certain families. Pyloric stenosis develops in about 20 percent of male descendants and 10 percent of female descendants of mothers who had the condition.
Smoking during pregnancy. This behavior can nearly double the risk of pyloric stenosis.
Early antibiotic use. Babies given certain antibiotics in the first weeks of life — erythromycin to treat whooping cough, for example — have an increased risk of pyloric stenosis. In addition, babies born to mothers who took certain antibiotics in late pregnancy may have an increased risk of pyloric stenosis.
Bottle-feeding. Some studies suggest that bottle-feeding rather than breast-feeding can increase the risk of pyloric stenosis. Most of the people who participated in these studies used formula rather than breast milk, so it isn't clear whether the increased risk is related to formula or the mechanism of bottle-feeding.
Pyloric stenosis can lead to:
Failure to grow and develop.
Dehydration. Frequent vomiting can cause dehydration and a mineral (electrolyte) imbalance. Electrolytes help regulate many vital functions.
Stomach irritation. Repeated vomiting can irritate your baby's stomach and may cause mild bleeding.
Jaundice. Rarely, a substance secreted by the liver (bilirubin) can build up, causing a yellowish discoloration of the skin and eyes.
Pyoderma gangrenosum usually starts with a small, red bump on your skin, which may resemble a spider bite. Within days, this bump can develop into a large, painful open sore.
The ulcer usually appears on your legs, but may develop anywhere on your body. Sometimes it appears around surgical sites. If you have several ulcers, they may grow and merge into one larger ulcer.
Talk to your doctor if you develop a painful, rapidly growing skin wound.
The exact cause of pyoderma gangrenosum is unknown. The condition is not infectious or contagious. It's often associated with autoimmune diseases such as ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease and arthritis. And it may have a genetic component.
If you have pyoderma gangrenosum, new skin trauma, such as a cut or puncture wound, may trigger new ulcers.
Certain factors may increase your risk of pyoderma gangrenosum, including:
Your age and sex. The condition can affect anyone at any age, though it's more common between 20 and 50 years of age.
Having inflammatory bowel disease. People with a digestive tract disease such as ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease are at increased risk of pyoderma gangrenosum.
Having arthritis. People with rheumatoid arthritis are at increased risk of pyoderma gangrenosum.
Having a blood disorder. People with acute myelogenous leukemia, myelodysplasia or a myeloproliferative disorder are at increased risk of pyoderma gangrenosum.
Possible complications of pyoderma gangrenosum include infection, scarring, uncontrolled pain, depression and loss of mobility.
Many people infected with Q fever never show symptoms. If you do have symptoms, you'll probably notice them between three and 30 days after exposure to the bacteria. Signs and symptoms may include: High fever, up to 105 F (41 C), Severe headache, Fatigue, Chills, Cough, Nausea, Vomiting, Diarrhea, Sensitivity to light.
Q fever is caused by the bacterium Coxiella burnetii, commonly found in sheep, goats and cattle. The bacterium can also infect pets, including cats, dogs and rabbits.
These animals transmit the bacteria through their urine, feces, milk and birthing products — such as the placenta and amniotic fluid. When these substances dry, the bacteria in them become part of the barnyard dust that floats in the air. The infection is usually transmitted to humans through their lungs, when they inhale contaminated barnyard dust.
Certain factors can increase your risk of being infected with Q fever bacteria, including:
Occupation. Certain occupations place you at higher risk because you're exposed to animals and animal products as part of your job. At-risk occupations include veterinary medicine, meat processing, livestock farming and animal research.
Location. Simply being near a farm or farming facility may put you at higher risk of Q fever, because the bacteria can travel long distances, accompanying dust particles in the air.
Your sex. Men are more likely to develop symptomatic acute Q fever.
Time of year. Q fever can occur at any time of the year, but the number of infections usually peaks in April and May in the U.S.
The risk of eventually developing the more deadly form of Q fever is increased in people who have: Heart valve disease, Blood vessel abnormalities, Weakened immune systems, Impaired kidney function.
A Q fever recurrence can affect your heart, liver, lungs and brain, giving rise to serious complications, such as:
Endocarditis. An inflammation of the membrane inside your heart, endocarditis can severely damage your heart valves. Endocarditis is the most deadly of Q fever's complications.
Lung issues. Some people who have Q fever develop pneumonia. This can lead to acute respiratory distress, a medical emergency in which you're not getting enough oxygen.
Pregnancy problems. Chronic Q fever increases the risk of miscarriage, low birth weight, premature birth and stillbirth.
Liver damage. Some people who have Q fever develop hepatitis, an inflammation of the liver that interferes with its function.
Meningitis. Q fever can cause meningitis, an inflammation of the membrane surrounding your brain and spinal cord.
The first symptoms of rabies may be very similar to those of the flu and may last for days.
Later signs and symptoms may include: Fever, Headache, Nausea, Vomiting, Agitation, Anxiety, Confusion, Hyperactivity, Difficulty swallowing, Excessive salivation, Fear brought on by attempts to drink fluids because of difficulty swallowing water, Hallucinations, Insomnia, Partial paralysis.
Seek immediate medical care if you're bitten by any animal, or exposed to an animal suspected of having rabies. Based on your injuries and the situation in which the exposure occurred, you and your doctor can decide whether you should receive treatment to prevent rabies.
Even if you aren't sure whether you've been bitten, seek medical attention. For instance, a bat that flies into your room while you're sleeping may bite you without waking you. If you awake to find a bat in your room, assume you've been bitten. Also, if you find a bat near a person who can't report a bite, such as a small child or a person with a disability, assume that person has been bitten.
Rabies infection is caused by the rabies virus. The virus is spread through the saliva of infected animals. Infected animals can spread the virus by biting another animal or a person.
In rare cases, rabies can be spread when infected saliva gets into an open wound or the mucous membranes, such as the mouth or eyes. This could occur if an infected animal were to lick an open cut on your skin.
Any mammal (an animal that suckles its young) can transmit the rabies virus. The animals most likely to transmit the rabies virus to people include: Cats, Cows, Dogs, Ferrets, Goats, Horses.
Bats, Beavers, Coyotes, Foxes, Monkeys, Raccoons, Skunks, Woodchucks.
In rare cases, the virus has been transmitted to tissue and organ transplant recipients from an infected organ.
Factors that can increase your risk of rabies include: Traveling or living in developing countries where rabies is more common, including countries in Africa and Southeast Asia, Activities that are likely to put you in contact with wild animals that may have rabies, such as exploring caves where bats live or camping without taking precautions to keep wild animals away from your campsite, Working in a laboratory with the rabies virus, Wounds to the head or neck, which may help the rabies virus travel to your brain more quickly.
Radiation enteritis symptoms include diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and belly cramps. This condition causes irritation of the intestines after radiation therapy for cancer. Symptoms usually go away several weeks after treatment ends. But sometimes they last longer. Radiation enteritis that goes on for longer can cause anemia and partial bowel obstruction.
The risk of radiation enteritis is higher in people undergoing radiation treatments for cancers in the belly and the pelvis. This condition causes irritation of the intestines after radiation therapy for cancer.
The severity of signs and symptoms of radiation sickness depends on how much radiation you've absorbed. How much you absorb depends on the strength of the radiated energy, the time of your exposures, and the distance between you and the source of radiation.
Signs and symptoms are also affected by the type of exposure — such as total or partial body. The severity of radiation sickness also depends on how sensitive the affected tissue is. For instance, the gastrointestinal system and bone marrow are highly sensitive to radiation.
The initial signs and symptoms of treatable radiation sickness are usually nausea and vomiting. The amount of time between exposure and when these symptoms develop is a clue to how much radiation a person has absorbed.
After the first round of signs and symptoms, a person with radiation sickness may have a brief period with no apparent illness, followed by the onset of new, more-serious symptoms.
If you've had a mild exposure, it may take hours to weeks before any signs and symptoms begin. But with severe exposure, signs and symptoms can begin minutes to days after exposure.
Possible symptoms include: Nausea and vomiting, Diarrhea, Headache, Fever, Dizziness and disorientation, Weakness and fatigue, Hair loss, Bloody vomit and stools from internal bleeding, Infections, Low blood pressure.
An accident or attack that causes radiation sickness would no doubt cause a lot of attention and public concern. If such an event occurs, monitor radio, television or online reports to learn about emergency instructions for your area.
If you know you've been overexposed to radiation, seek emergency medical care.
Radiation is the energy released from atoms as either a wave or a tiny particle of matter. Radiation sickness is caused by exposure to a high dose of radiation, such as a high dose of radiation received during an industrial accident.
Possible sources of high-dose radiation include the following: An accident at a nuclear industrial facility, An attack on a nuclear industrial facility, Detonation of a small radioactive device, Detonation of a conventional explosive device that disperses radioactive material (dirty bomb), Detonation of a standard nuclear weapon.
Radiation sickness occurs when high-energy radiation damages or destroys certain cells in your body. Regions of the body most vulnerable to high-energy radiation are cells in the lining of your intestinal tract, including your stomach, and the blood cell-producing cells of bone marrow.
Having radiation sickness can contribute to both short-term and long-term mental health problems, such as grief, fear and anxiety about: Experiencing a radioactive accident or attack, Mourning friends or family who haven't survived, Dealing with the uncertainty of a mysterious and potentially fatal illness, Worrying about the eventual risk of cancer due to radiation exposure.
The two main signs and symptoms of Ramsay Hunt syndrome are: A painful red rash with fluid-filled blisters on, in and around one ear, Facial weakness or paralysis on the same side as the affected ear.
Usually, the rash and the facial paralysis occur at the same time. Sometimes one can happen before the other. Other times, the rash never occurs.
If you have Ramsay Hunt syndrome, you might also experience: Ear pain, Hearing loss, Ringing in your ears (tinnitus), Difficulty closing one eye, A sensation of spinning or moving (vertigo), A change in taste perception or loss of taste, Dry mouth and eyes.
Call your doctor if you experience facial paralysis or a shingles rash on your face. Treatment that starts within three days of the start of signs and symptoms may help prevent long-term complications.
Ramsay Hunt syndrome occurs in people who've had chickenpox. Once you recover from chickenpox, the virus stays in your body — sometimes reactivating in later years to cause shingles, a painful rash with fluid-filled blisters.
Ramsay Hunt syndrome is a shingles outbreak that affects the facial nerve near one of your ears. It can also causes one-sided facial paralysis and hearing loss.
Ramsay Hunt syndrome can occur in anyone who has had chickenpox. It's more common in older adults, typically affecting people older than 60. Ramsay Hunt syndrome is rare in children.
Ramsay Hunt syndrome isn't contagious. However, reactivation of the varicella-zoster virus can cause chickenpox in people who haven't previously had chickenpox or been vaccinated for it. The infection can be serious for people who have immune system problems.
Until the rash blisters scab over, avoid physical contact with: Anyone who's never had chickenpox or who's never had the chickenpox vaccine, Anyone who has a weak immune system, Newborns, Pregnant women.
Complications of Ramsay Hunt syndrome may include:
Permanent hearing loss and facial weakness. For most people, the hearing loss and facial paralysis associated with Ramsay Hunt syndrome is temporary. However, it can become permanent.
Eye damage. The facial weakness caused by Ramsay Hunt syndrome may make it difficult for you to close your eyelid. When this happens, the cornea, which protects your eye, can become damaged. This damage can cause eye pain and blurred vision.
Postherpetic neuralgia. This painful condition occurs when a shingles infection damages nerve fibers. The messages sent by these nerve fibers become confused and exaggerated, causing pain that may last long after other signs and symptoms of Ramsay Hunt syndrome have faded.
Signs and symptoms of Raynaud's disease include: Cold fingers or toes, Color changes in your skin in response to cold or stress, Numb, prickly feeling or stinging pain upon warming or stress relief.
During an attack of Raynaud's, affected areas of your skin usually first turn white. Then, they often turn blue and feel cold and numb. As you warm and circulation improves, the affected areas may turn red, throb, tingle or swell.
Although Raynaud's most commonly affects your fingers and toes, it can also affect other areas of your body, such as your nose, lips, ears and even nipples. After warming, it can take 15 minutes for normal blood flow to return to the area.
See your doctor right away if you have a history of severe Raynaud's and develop a sore or infection in one of your affected fingers or toes.
Doctors don't completely understand the cause of Raynaud's attacks, but blood vessels in the hands and feet appear to overreact to cold temperatures or stress.
With Raynaud's, arteries to your fingers and toes go into vasospasm when exposed to cold or stress, narrowing your vessels and temporarily limiting blood supply. Over time, these small arteries can thicken slightly, further limiting blood flow.
Cold temperatures are most likely to trigger an attack. Exposure to cold, such as putting your hands in cold water, taking something from a freezer or being in cold air, is the most likely trigger. For some people, emotional stress can trigger an episode.
There are two main types of the condition.
Primary Raynaud's. Also called Raynaud's disease, this most common form isn't the result of an associated medical condition. It can be so mild that many people with primary Raynaud's don't seek treatment. And it can resolve on its own.
Secondary Raynaud's. Also called Raynaud's phenomenon, this form is caused by an underlying problem. Although secondary Raynaud's is less common than the primary form, it tends to be more serious.
Signs and symptoms of secondary Raynaud's usually appear around age 40, later than they do for primary Raynaud's.
Causes of secondary Raynaud's include:
Connective tissue diseases. Most people who have a rare disease that leads to hardening and scarring of the skin (scleroderma) have Raynaud's. Other diseases that increase the risk of Raynaud's include lupus, rheumatoid arthritis and Sjogren's syndrome.
Diseases of the arteries. These include a buildup of plaques in blood vessels that feed the heart (atherosclerosis), a disorder in which the blood vessels of the hands and feet become inflamed (Buerger's disease), and a type of high blood pressure that affects the arteries of the lungs (primary pulmonary hypertension).
Carpal tunnel syndrome. This condition involves pressure on a major nerve to your hand, producing numbness and pain in the hand that can make the hand more susceptible to cold temperatures.
Repetitive action or vibration. Typing, playing piano or doing similar movements for long periods and operating vibrating tools, such as jackhammers, can lead to overuse injuries.
Smoking. Smoking constricts blood vessels.
Injuries to the hands or feet. These include wrist fracture, surgery or frostbite.
Certain medications. These include beta blockers, used to treat high blood pressure; migraine medications that contain ergotamine or sumatriptan; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder medications; certain chemotherapy agents; and drugs that cause blood vessels to narrow, such as some over-the-counter cold medications.
Risk factors for primary Raynaud's include:
Sex. More women than men are affected.
Age. Although anyone can develop the condition, primary Raynaud's often begins between the ages of 15 and 30.
Climate. The disorder is also more common in people who live in colder climates.
Family history. A first-degree relative — a parent, sibling or child — having the disease appears to increase your risk of primary Raynaud's.
Risk factors for secondary Raynaud's include:
Associated diseases. These include conditions such as scleroderma and lupus.
Certain occupations. These include jobs that cause repetitive trauma, such as operating tools that vibrate.
Exposure to certain substances. This includes smoking, taking medications that affect the blood vessels and being exposed to certain chemicals, such as vinyl chloride.
If secondary Raynaud's is severe — which is rare — diminished blood circulation to your fingers or toes could cause tissue damage.
A completely blocked artery can lead to sores (skin ulcers) or dead tissue (gangrene), both of which can be difficult to treat. Rarely, extreme untreated cases might require removing the affected part of your body (amputation).
The signs and symptoms of reactive arthritis generally start one to four weeks after exposure to a triggering infection. They might include:
Pain and stiffness. The joint pain associated with reactive arthritis most commonly occurs in your knees, ankles and feet. You also might have pain in your heels, low back or buttocks.
Eye inflammation. Many people who have reactive arthritis also develop eye inflammation (conjunctivitis).
Urinary problems. Increased frequency and discomfort during urination may occur, as can inflammation of the prostate gland or cervix.
Inflammation of soft tissue where it enters bone (enthesitis). This might include muscles, tendons and ligaments.
Swollen toes or fingers. In some cases, your toes or fingers might become so swollen that they resemble sausages.
Skin problems. Reactive arthritis can affect your skin a variety of ways, including a rash on your soles and palms and mouth sores.
Low back pain. The pain tends to be worse at night or in the morning.
If you develop joint pain within a month of having diarrhea or a genital infection, contact your doctor.
Reactive arthritis develops in reaction to an infection in your body, often in your intestines, genitals or urinary tract. You might not be aware of the triggering infection if it causes mild symptoms or none at all.
Numerous bacteria can cause reactive arthritis. Some are transmitted sexually, and others are foodborne. The most common ones include: Chlamydia, Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia, Campylobacter, Clostridium difficile.
Reactive arthritis isn't contagious. However, the bacteria that cause it can be transmitted sexually or in contaminated food. Only a few of the people who are exposed to these bacteria develop reactive arthritis.
Certain factors increase your risk of reactive arthritis:
Age. Reactive arthritis occurs most frequently in adults between the ages of 20 and 40.
Sex. Women and men are equally likely to develop reactive arthritis in response to foodborne infections. However, men are more likely than are women to develop reactive arthritis in response to sexually transmitted bacteria.
Hereditary factors. A specific genetic marker has been linked to reactive arthritis. But many people who have this marker never develop the condition.
Reactive attachment disorder can start in infancy. There's little research on signs and symptoms of reactive attachment disorder beyond early childhood, and it remains uncertain whether it occurs in children older than 5 years.
Signs and symptoms may include: Unexplained withdrawal, fear, sadness or irritability, Sad and listless appearance, Not seeking comfort or showing no response when comfort is given, Failure to smile, Watching others closely but not engaging in social interaction, Failing to ask for support or assistance, Failure to reach out when picked up, No interest in playing peekaboo or other interactive games.
Consider getting an evaluation if your child shows any of the signs above. Signs can occur in children who don't have reactive attachment disorder or who have another disorder, such as autism spectrum disorder. It's important to have your child evaluated by a pediatric psychiatrist or psychologist who can determine whether such behaviors indicate a more serious problem.
To feel safe and develop trust, infants and young children need a stable, caring environment. Their basic emotional and physical needs must be consistently met. For instance, when a baby cries, the need for a meal or a diaper change must be met with a shared emotional exchange that may include eye contact, smiling and caressing.
A child whose needs are ignored or met with a lack of emotional response from caregivers does not come to expect care or comfort or form a stable attachment to caregivers.
It's not clear why some babies and children develop reactive attachment disorder and others don't. Various theories about reactive attachment disorder and its causes exist, and more research is needed to develop a better understanding and improve diagnosis and treatment options.
The risk of developing reactive attachment disorder from serious social and emotional neglect or the lack of opportunity to develop stable attachments may increase in children who, for example: Live in a children's home or other institution, Frequently change foster homes or caregivers, Have parents who have severe mental health problems, criminal behavior or substance abuse that impairs their parenting, Have prolonged separation from parents or other caregivers due to hospitalization.
However, most children who are severely neglected don't develop reactive attachment disorder.
Without treatment, reactive attachment disorder can continue for several years and may have lifelong consequences.
Some research suggests that some children and teenagers with reactive attachment disorder may display callous, unemotional traits that can include behavior problems and cruelty toward people or animals. However, more research is needed to determine if problems in older children and adults are related to experiences of reactive attachment disorder in early childhood.
Signs and symptoms of rectal cancer include: A change in bowel habits, such as diarrhea, constipation or more-frequent bowel movements, Dark maroon or bright red blood in stool, Narrow stool, A feeling that your bowel doesn't empty completely, Abdominal pain, Unexplained weight loss, Weakness or fatigue.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent symptoms that worry you.
Rectal cancer begins when healthy cells in the rectum develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do.
The changes tell the cells to grow uncontrollably and to continue living after healthy cells would die. The accumulating cells can form a tumor. With time, the cancer cells can grow to invade and destroy healthy tissue nearby. And cancerous cells can break away and travel (metastasize) to other parts of the body.
For most rectal cancers, it's not clear what causes the mutations that cause the cancer to form.
In some families, gene mutations passed from parents to children increase the risk of colorectal cancer. These mutations are involved in only a small percentage of rectal cancers. Some genes linked to colorectal cancer increase the risk of developing the disease, but they don't make it inevitable.
Two well-defined genetic colorectal cancer syndromes are:
Lynch syndrome. Lynch syndrome, also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), increases the risk of colon cancer and other cancers. People with Lynch syndrome tend to develop colon cancer before age 50.
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). FAP is a rare disorder that causes thousands of polyps in the lining of your colon and rectum. People with untreated FAP have a significantly increased risk of developing colon or rectal cancer before age 40.
Genetic testing can detect these and other, rarer inherited colorectal cancer syndromes. If you're concerned about your family history of colon cancer, talk to your doctor about whether your family history suggests you have a risk of these conditions.
Factors that may increase the risk of rectal cancer are the same as those that increase the risk of colon cancer. Colorectal cancer risk factors include:
Older age. Colorectal cancer can be diagnosed at any age, but most people with this type of cancer are older than 50. The rates of colorectal cancer in people younger than 50 have been increasing, but doctors aren't sure why.
African-American descent. People of African ancestry born in the United States have a greater risk of colorectal cancer than do people of European ancestry.
A personal history of colorectal cancer or polyps. Your risk of colorectal cancer is higher if you've already had rectal cancer, colon cancer or adenomatous polyps.
Inflammatory bowel disease. Chronic inflammatory diseases of the colon and rectum, such as ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, increase your risk of colorectal cancer.
Inherited syndromes that increase rectal cancer risk. Genetic syndromes passed through generations of your family can increase your risk of colon and rectal cancer, including FAP and Lynch syndrome.
Family history of colorectal cancer. You're more likely to develop colorectal cancer if you have a parent, sibling or child with colon or rectal cancer.
Eating a diet low in vegetables. Colorectal cancer may be associated with a diet low in vegetables and high in red meat, particularly when the meat is charred or well done.
Too little exercise. If you're inactive, you're more likely to develop colorectal cancer. Getting regular physical activity may reduce your risk of cancer.
Diabetes. People with poorly controlled type 2 diabetes may have an increased risk of colorectal cancer.
Obesity. Obese people have an increased risk of colorectal cancer when compared with people considered at a healthy weight.
Smoking. People who smoke may have an increased risk of colorectal cancer.
Drinking alcohol. Regularly drinking more than three alcoholic beverages a week may increase your risk of colorectal cancer.
Radiation therapy for previous cancer. Radiation therapy directed at the abdomen to treat previous cancers may increase the risk of colorectal cancer.
Depending on the fistula's size and location, you may have minor symptoms or significant problems with continence and hygiene. Signs and symptoms of a rectovaginal fistula may include: Passage of gas, stool or pus from your vagina, Foul-smelling vaginal discharge, Recurrent vaginal or urinary tract infections, Irritation or pain in the vulva, vagina and the area between your vagina and anus (perineum), Pain during sexual intercourse.
See your doctor if you experience any signs or symptoms of a rectovaginal fistula. A fistula may be the first warning of a more serious problem, such as an infected, pus-filled area (abscess) or cancer. Identifying the cause of the fistula can help your doctor determine a treatment plan.
A rectovaginal fistula may form as a result of:
Injuries during childbirth. Delivery-related injuries are the most common cause of rectovaginal fistulas. This includes tears in the perineum that extend to the bowel, or an infection of an episiotomy — a surgical incision to enlarge the perineum during vaginal delivery. These may happen following a long, difficult, or obstructed labor. These types of fistulas may also involve injury to your anal sphincter, the rings of muscle at the end of the rectum that help you hold in stool.
Crohn's disease. The second most common cause of rectovaginal fistulas, Crohn's disease is an inflammatory bowel disease in which the digestive tract lining is inflamed. Most women with Crohn's disease never develop a rectovaginal fistula, but having Crohn's disease does increase your risk of the condition.
Cancer or radiation treatment in your pelvic area. A cancerous tumor in your rectum, cervix, vagina, uterus or anal canal can result in a rectovaginal fistula. Radiation therapy for cancers in these areas can also put you at risk. A fistula caused by radiation usually forms within six months to two years after treatment.
Surgery involving your vagina, perineum, rectum or anus. Prior surgery in your lower pelvic region, such as removal of your uterus (hysterectomy), in rare cases can lead to development of a fistula. The fistula may develop as a result of an injury during surgery or a leak or infection that develops afterward.
Other causes. Rarely, a rectovaginal fistula may be caused by infections in your anus or rectum; infections of small, bulging pouches in your digestive tract (diverticulitis); long-term inflammation of your colon and rectum (ulcerative colitis); dry, hard stool that gets stuck in the rectum (fecal impaction); or vaginal injury unrelated to childbirth.
Physical complications of a rectovaginal fistula may include: Uncontrolled loss of stool (fecal incontinence), Hygiene problems, Recurrent vaginal or urinary tract infections, Irritation or inflammation of your vagina, perineum or the skin around your anus, An infected fistula that forms an abscess, a problem that can become life-threatening if not treated, Fistula recurrence.
Among women with Crohn's disease who develop a fistula, the chances of complications are high. These can include poor healing, or another fistula forming later.
Signs and symptoms of recurrent breast cancer vary depending on where the cancer comes back.
In a local recurrence, cancer reappears in the same area as your original cancer.
If you've undergone a lumpectomy, the cancer could recur in the remaining breast tissue. If you've undergone a mastectomy, the cancer could recur in the tissue that lines the chest wall or in the skin.
Signs and symptoms of local recurrence within the same breast may include: A new lump in your breast or irregular area of firmness, Changes to the skin of your breast, Skin inflammation or area of redness, Nipple discharge.
Signs and symptoms of local recurrence on the chest wall after a mastectomy may include: One or more painless nodules on or under the skin of your chest wall, A new area of thickening along or near the mastectomy scar.
A regional breast cancer recurrence means the cancer has come back in the nearby lymph nodes.
Signs and symptoms of regional recurrence may include a lump or swelling in the lymph nodes located: Under your arm, Near your collarbone, In the groove above your collarbone, In your neck.
A distant (metastatic) recurrence means the cancer has traveled to distant parts of the body, most commonly the bones, liver and lungs.
Signs and symptoms include: Persistent and worsening pain, such as chest, back or hip pain, Persistent cough, Difficulty breathing, Loss of appetite, Weight loss without trying, Severe headaches, Seizures.
After your breast cancer treatment ends, your doctor will likely create a schedule of follow-up exams for you. During follow-up exams, your doctor checks for any symptoms or signs of cancer recurrence.
You can also report any new signs or symptoms to your doctor. Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
Recurrent breast cancer occurs when cells that were part of your original breast cancer break away from the original tumor and hide nearby in the breast or in another part of your body. Later, these cells begin growing again.
The chemotherapy, radiation, hormone therapy or other treatment you may have received after your first breast cancer diagnosis was intended to kill any cancer cells that may have remained after surgery. But sometimes these treatments aren't able to kill all of the cancer cells.
Sometimes cancer cells may be dormant for years without causing harm. Then something happens that activates the cells, so they grow and spread to other parts of the body. It's not clear why this occurs.
For breast cancer survivors, factors that increase the risk of a recurrence include:
Lymph node involvement. Finding cancer in nearby lymph nodes at the time of your original diagnosis increases your risk of the cancer coming back.
Larger tumor size. People with larger tumors have a greater risk of recurrent breast cancer.
Positive or close tumor margins. During breast cancer surgery, the surgeon tries to remove the cancer along with a small amount of the normal tissue that surrounds it. A pathologist examines the edges of the tissue to look for cancer cells.
If the borders are free of cancer when examined under a microscope, that's considered a negative margin. If any part of the border has cancer cells (positive margin), or the margin between the tumor and normal tissue is close, the risk of breast cancer recurrence is increased.
Lack of radiation treatment following a lumpectomy. Most people who choose a lumpectomy (wide local excision) for breast cancer undergo breast radiation therapy to reduce the risk of recurrence. Those who don't undergo the radiation therapy have an increased risk of local breast cancer recurrence.
Younger age. Younger people, particularly those under age 35 at the time of their original breast cancer diagnosis, face a higher risk of recurrent breast cancer.
Inflammatory breast cancer. People with inflammatory breast cancer have a higher risk of local recurrence.
Lack of endocrine therapy for hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. In people who have a certain type of breast cancer, not receiving endocrine therapy can raise their risk of recurrence.
Cancer cells with certain characteristics. If your breast cancer wasn't responsive to hormone therapy or treatments directed at the HER2 gene (triple negative breast cancer), you may have an increased risk of breast cancer recurrence.
Obesity. Having a higher body mass index increases your risk of recurrence.
With REM sleep behavior disorder, instead of experiencing the normal temporary paralysis of your arms and legs (atonia) during REM sleep, you physically act out your dreams.
The onset can be gradual or sudden, and episodes may occur occasionally or several times a night. The disorder often worsens with time.
Symptoms of REM sleep behavior disorder may include: Movement, such as kicking, punching, arm flailing or jumping from bed, in response to action-filled or violent dreams, such as being chased or defending yourself from an attack, Noises, such as talking, laughing, shouting, emotional outcries or even cursing, Being able to recall the dream if you awaken during the episode.
If you have any of the symptoms above or are experiencing other problems sleeping, talk to your doctor.
Nerve pathways in the brain that prevent muscles from moving are active during normal REM or dreaming sleep, resulting in temporary paralysis of your body. In REM sleep behavior disorder, these pathways no longer work and you may physically act out your dreams.
Factors associated with the development of REM sleep behavior disorder include: Being male and over 50 years old — however, more women are now being diagnosed with the disorder, especially under age 50, and young adults and children can develop the disorder, usually in association with narcolepsy, antidepressant use or brain tumors, Having a certain type of neurodegenerative disorder, such as Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy, stroke or dementia with Lewy bodies, Having narcolepsy, a chronic sleep disorder characterized by overwhelming daytime drowsiness, Taking certain medications, especially newer antidepressants, or the use or withdrawal of drugs or alcohol.
Recent evidence suggests that there may also be several specific environmental or personal risk factors for REM sleep behavior disorder, including occupational pesticide exposure, farming, smoking or a previous head injury.
Complications caused by REM sleep behavior disorder may include: Distress to your sleeping partner or other people living in your home, Social isolation for fear that others may become aware of your sleep disruption, Injury to yourself or your sleeping partner.
Renal artery stenosis often doesn't cause any signs or symptoms until it's advanced. The condition may be discovered incidentally during testing for something else. Your doctor may also suspect a problem if you have: High blood pressure that begins suddenly or worsens without explanation, High blood pressure that begins before age 30 or after age 50.
As renal artery stenosis progresses, other signs and symptoms may include: High blood pressure that's hard to control, A whooshing sound as blood flows through a narrowed vessel (bruit), which your doctor hears through a stethoscope placed over your kidneys, Elevated protein levels in the urine or other signs of abnormal kidney function, Worsening kidney function during treatment for high blood pressure, Fluid overload and swelling in your body's tissues, Treatment-resistant heart failure.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
The two main causes of renal artery stenosis include:
Buildup on kidney (renal) arteries. Fats, cholesterol and other substances (plaque) can build up in and on your kidney artery walls (atherosclerosis). As these deposits get larger, they can harden, reduce blood flow, cause kidney scarring and eventually narrow the artery. Atherosclerosis occurs in many areas of the body and is the most common cause of renal artery stenosis.
Fibromuscular dysplasia. In fibromuscular dysplasia, the muscle in the artery wall grows abnormally, often from childhood. The renal artery can have narrow sections alternating with wider sections, giving a bead-like appearance in images of the artery.
The renal artery can narrow so much that the kidney doesn't get an adequate supply of blood and can lead to high blood pressure at a young age. This can happen in one or both kidneys. Experts don't know what causes fibromuscular dysplasia, but the condition is more common in women and may be something that's present at birth (congenital).
Narrowed kidney arteries and fibromuscular dysplasia can affect other arteries in your body as well as your kidney arteries and cause complications.
Rarely, renal artery stenosis results from other conditions such as inflammation of the blood vessels or a growth that develops in your abdomen and presses on your kidneys' arteries.
Most cases of renal artery stenosis result from narrowed kidney arteries. Risk factors that make narrowed arteries more likely in your kidneys and other parts of your body include: Aging, High blood pressure, High cholesterol, Diabetes, Obesity, Smoking and other tobacco use, A family history of early heart disease, Lack of exercise.
Possible complications of renal artery stenosis include: High blood pressure, Kidney failure, requiring treatment with dialysis or a kidney transplant, Fluid retention in your legs, causing swollen ankles or feet, Shortness of breath due to a sudden buildup of fluid in the lungs.
Signs and symptoms of respiratory syncytial virus infection most commonly appear about four to six days after exposure to the virus. In adults and older children, RSV usually causes mild cold-like signs and symptoms. These include: Congested or runny nose, Dry cough, Low-grade fever, Sore throat, Mild headache.
Respiratory syncytial virus infection can spread to the lower respiratory tract, causing pneumonia or bronchiolitis — inflammation of the small airway passages entering the lungs. Signs and symptoms may include: Fever, Severe cough, Wheezing — a high-pitched noise that's usually heard on breathing out (exhaling), Rapid breathing or difficulty breathing — the child may prefer to sit up rather than lie down, Bluish color of the skin due to lack of oxygen (cyanosis).
Infants are most severely affected by RSV. You may notice your child's chest muscles and skin pull inward with each breath. This is a sign that he or she is struggling to breathe. Other signs and symptoms of severe RSV infection in infants include: Short, shallow and rapid breathing, Cough, Poor feeding, Unusual tiredness (lethargy), Irritability.
Most children and adults recover in one to two weeks, although some might have repeated wheezing. Severe or life-threatening infection requiring a hospital stay may occur in premature babies or infants and adults who have chronic heart or lung problems.
Seek immediate medical attention if your child — or anyone at risk of severe RSV infection — has difficulty breathing, a high fever, or a blue color to the skin, particularly on the lips and in the nail beds.
Respiratory syncytial virus enters the body through the eyes, nose or mouth. It spreads easily through the air on infected respiratory droplets. You or your child can become infected if someone with RSV coughs or sneezes near you. The virus also passes to others through direct contact, such as shaking hands.
The virus can live for hours on hard objects such as countertops, crib rails and toys. Touch your mouth, nose or eyes after touching a contaminated object and you're likely to pick up the virus.
An infected person is most contagious in the first few days after infection. However, the virus may continue to spread for up to a few weeks.
By age 2, most children will have been infected with respiratory syncytial virus. Children who attend child care centers or who have siblings who attend school are at a higher risk of exposure. RSV season — when outbreaks tend to occur — is the fall to the end of spring.
People at increased risk of severe or sometimes life-threatening RSV infections include: Premature infants, Young children who have congenital heart or lung disease, Children with weakened immune systems, such as those undergoing chemotherapy or transplantation, Infants in crowded child care settings, Older adults, Adults with asthma, congestive heart failure or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, People with immunodeficiency, including those with certain transplanted organs, leukemia or HIV/AIDS.
Complications of respiratory syncytial virus include:
Hospitalization. A severe RSV infection may require a hospital stay so that doctors can monitor and treat breathing problems and give intravenous (IV) fluids.
Pneumonia. RSV is the most common cause of inflammation of the lungs (pneumonia) or the lungs' airways (bronchiolitis) in infants. These complications can occur when the virus spreads to the lower respiratory tract. Lung inflammation can be quite serious in infants, young children, immunocompromised individuals, or people with chronic heart or lung disease.
Middle ear infection. If germs enter the space behind the eardrum, you can get a middle ear infection (otitis media). This happens most frequently in infants and young children.
Asthma. There may be a link between severe respiratory syncytial virus in children and the chance of developing asthma later in life.
Repeated infections. Once you've had RSV, it's common for the infection to come back. It's even possible for it to happen during the same RSV season. However, symptoms usually aren't as severe — typically it's in the form of a common cold. But they can be serious in older adults or people with chronic heart or lung disease.
The chief symptom is an urge to move the legs. Common accompanying characteristics of RLS include:
Sensations that begin after rest. The sensation typically begins after you've been lying down or sitting for an extended time, such as in a car, airplane or movie theater.
Relief with movement. The sensation of RLS lessens with movement, such as stretching, jiggling your legs, pacing or walking.
Worsening of symptoms in the evening. Symptoms occur mainly at night.
Nighttime leg twitching. RLS may be associated with another, more common condition called periodic limb movement of sleep, which causes your legs to twitch and kick, possibly throughout the night, while you sleep.
People typically describe RLS symptoms as abnormal, unpleasant sensations in their legs or feet. They usually happen on both sides of the body. Less commonly, the sensations affect the arms.
The sensations, which generally occur within the limb rather than on the skin, are described as: Crawling, Creeping, Pulling, Throbbing, Aching, Itching, Electric.
Sometimes the sensations are difficult to explain. People with RLS usually don't describe the condition as a muscle cramp or numbness. They do, however, consistently describe the desire to move their legs.
It's common for symptoms to fluctuate in severity. Sometimes, symptoms disappear for periods of time, then come back.
Some people with RLS never seek medical attention because they worry they won't be taken seriously. But RLS can interfere with your sleep and cause daytime drowsiness and affect your quality of life. Talk with your doctor if you think you may have RLS.
Often, there's no known cause for RLS. Researchers suspect the condition may be caused by an imbalance of the brain chemical dopamine, which sends messages to control muscle movement.
Sometimes RLS runs in families, especially if the condition starts before age 40. Researchers have identified sites on the chromosomes where genes for RLS may be present.
Pregnancy or hormonal changes may temporarily worsen RLS signs and symptoms. Some women get RLS for the first time during pregnancy, especially during their last trimester. However, symptoms usually disappear after delivery.
RLS can develop at any age, even during childhood. The disorder is more common with increasing age and more common in women than in men.
RLS usually isn't related to a serious underlying medical problem. However, it sometimes accompanies other conditions, such as:
Peripheral neuropathy. This damage to the nerves in your hands and feet is sometimes due to chronic diseases such as diabetes and alcoholism.
Iron deficiency. Even without anemia, iron deficiency can cause or worsen RLS. If you have a history of bleeding from your stomach or bowels, experience heavy menstrual periods, or repeatedly donate blood, you may have iron deficiency.
Kidney failure. If you have kidney failure, you may also have iron deficiency, often with anemia. When kidneys don't function properly, iron stores in your blood can decrease. This and other changes in body chemistry may cause or worsen RLS.
Spinal cord conditions. Lesions on the spinal cord as a result of damage or injury have been linked to RLS. Having had anesthesia to the spinal cord, such as a spinal block, also increases the risk of developing RLS.
Although RLS doesn't lead to other serious conditions, symptoms can range from barely bothersome to incapacitating. Many people with RLS find it difficult to fall or stay asleep.
Severe RLS can cause marked impairment in life quality and can result in depression. Insomnia may lead to excessive daytime drowsiness, but RLS may interfere with napping.
Retinal detachment itself is painless. But warning signs almost always appear before it occurs or has advanced, such as: The sudden appearance of many floaters — tiny specks that seem to drift through your field of vision, Flashes of light in one or both eyes (photopsia), Blurred vision, Gradually reduced side (peripheral) vision, A curtain-like shadow over your visual field.
Seek immediate medical attention if you are experiencing the signs or symptoms of retinal detachment. Retinal detachment is a medical emergency in which you can permanently lose your vision.
There are three different types of retinal detachment:
Rhegmatogenous (reg-ma-TODGE-uh-nus). These types of retinal detachments are the most common. Rhegmatogenous detachments are caused by a hole or tear in the retina that allows fluid to pass through and collect underneath the retina, pulling the retina away from underlying tissues. The areas where the retina detaches lose their blood supply and stop working, causing you to lose vision.
The most common cause of rhegmatogenous detachment is aging. As you age, the gel-like material that fills the inside of your eye, known as the vitreous (VIT-ree-us), may change in consistency and shrink or become more liquid. Normally, the vitreous separates from the surface of the retina without any complications — a common condition called posterior vitreous detachment (PVD). One complication of this separation is a tear.
As the vitreous separates or peels off the retina, it may tug on the retina with enough force to create a retinal tear. Left untreated, the liquid vitreous can pass through the tear into the space behind the retina, causing the retina to become detached.
Tractional. This type of detachment can occur when scar tissue grows on the retina's surface, causing the retina to pull away from the back of the eye. Tractional detachment is typically seen in people who have poorly controlled diabetes or other conditions.
Exudative. In this type of detachment, fluid accumulates beneath the retina, but there are no holes or tears in the retina. Exudative detachment can be caused by age-related macular degeneration, injury to the eye, tumors or inflammatory disorders.
The following factors increase your risk of retinal detachment: Aging — retinal detachment is more common in people over age 50, Previous retinal detachment in one eye, Family history of retinal detachment, Extreme nearsightedness (myopia), Previous eye surgery, such as cataract removal, Previous severe eye injury, Previous other eye disease or disorder, including retinoschisis, uveitis or thinning of the peripheral retina (lattice degeneration).
Many retinal diseases share some common signs and symptoms. These may include: Seeing floating specks or cobwebs, Blurred or distorted (straight lines look wavy) vision, Defects in the side vision, Lost vision.
You may need to try looking with each eye alone to notice these.
It's important to pay attention to any changes in your vision and find care quickly. Seek immediate medical attention if you suddenly have floaters, flashes or reduced vision. These are warning signs of potentially serious retinal disease.
Risk factors for retinal diseases might include: Aging, Smoking, Being obese, Having diabetes or other diseases, Eye trauma, A family history of retinal diseases.
Because retinoblastoma mostly affects infants and small children, symptoms are rare. Signs you may notice include: A white color in the center circle of the eye (pupil) when light is shone in the eye, such as when taking a flash photograph, Eyes that appear to be looking in different directions, Eye redness, Eye swelling.
Make an appointment with your child's doctor if you notice any changes to your child's eyes that concern you. Retinoblastoma is a rare cancer, so your child's doctor may explore other more common eye conditions first.
If you have a family history of retinoblastoma, ask your pediatrician when your child should begin regular eye exams to screen for retinoblastoma.
Retinoblastoma occurs when nerve cells in the retina develop genetic mutations. These mutations cause the cells to continue growing and multiplying when healthy cells would die. This accumulating mass of cells forms a tumor.
Retinoblastoma cells can invade further into the eye and nearby structures. Retinoblastoma can also spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body, including the brain and spine.
In the majority of cases, it's not clear what causes the genetic mutations that lead to retinoblastoma. However, it's possible for children to inherit a genetic mutation from their parents.
Gene mutations that increase the risk of retinoblastoma and other cancers can be passed from parents to children.
Hereditary retinoblastoma is passed from parents to children in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means only one parent needs a single copy of the mutated gene to pass the increased risk of retinoblastoma on to the children. If one parent carries a mutated gene, each child has a 50 percent chance of inheriting that gene.
Although a genetic mutation increases a child's risk of retinoblastoma, it doesn't mean that cancer is inevitable.
Children with the inherited form of retinoblastoma tend to develop the disease at an earlier age. Hereditary retinoblastoma also tends to occur in both eyes, as opposed to just one eye.
Children treated for retinoblastoma have a risk of cancer returning in and around the treated eye. For this reason, your child's doctor will schedule follow-up exams to check for recurrent retinoblastoma. The doctor may design a personalized follow-up exam schedule for your child. In most cases, this will likely involve eye exams every few months for the first few years after retinoblastoma treatment ends.
Additionally, children with the inherited form of retinoblastoma have an increased risk of developing other types of cancers in any part of the body in the years after treatment. For this reason, children with inherited retinoblastoma may have regular exams to screen for other cancers.
Testicles form in the abdomen during fetal development. During the final months of development, the testicles gradually descend into the scrotum. If this descent isn't completed at birth, the testicle usually descends within a few months. If your son has a retractile testicle, the testicle originally descended as it should, but doesn't remain in place.
Signs and symptoms of a retractile testicle include:
The testicle may be moved by hand from the groin into the scrotum and won't immediately retreat to the groin.
The testicle might spontaneously appear in the scrotum and remain there for a time.
The testicle might spontaneously disappear again for a time.
Retractile testicle is different from undescended testicle (cryptorchidism). An undescended testicle is one that never entered the scrotum.
During regular well-baby checkups and annual childhood checkups, your son's doctor will examine your son's testicles to determine if they're descended and appropriately developed. If you believe that your son has a retractile or ascending testicle — or have other concerns about the development of his testicles — see his doctor. He or she will tell you how often to schedule checkups to monitor changes in the condition.
An overactive muscle causes a testicle to become a retractile testicle. The cremaster muscle is a thin pouch-like muscle in which a testicle rests. When the cremaster muscle contracts, it pulls the testicle up toward the body. The cremaster reflex can be stimulated by rubbing a nerve on the inner thigh and by emotion, such as fear and laughter. The cremaster is also activated by a cold environment.
If the cremaster reflex is strong enough, it can result in a retractile testicle, pulling the testicle out of the scrotum and up into the groin.
Retractile testicles are generally not associated with complications, aside from a greater risk of the testicle becoming an ascending testicle.
Retrograde ejaculation doesn't affect your ability to get an erection or have an orgasm — but when you climax, semen goes into your bladder instead of coming out of your penis. Retrograde ejaculation signs and symptoms include: Orgasms in which you ejaculate very little or no semen out of your penis (dry orgasms), Urine that is cloudy after orgasm because it contains semen, Inability to get a woman pregnant (male infertility).
Retrograde ejaculation isn't harmful and requires treatment only if you're attempting to father a child. However, if you have dry orgasms, see your doctor to be sure your condition isn't caused by an underlying problem that needs attention.
If you and your female partner have had regular, unprotected intercourse for a year or longer and have been unable to conceive, see your doctor. Retrograde ejaculation might be the cause of your problem if you ejaculate very little or no semen.
During a male orgasm, a tube called the vas deferens transports sperm to the prostate, where they mix with other fluids to produce liquid semen (ejaculate). The muscle at the opening of the bladder (bladder neck muscle) tightens to prevent ejaculate from entering the bladder as it passes from the prostate into the tube inside the penis (urethra). This is the same muscle that holds urine in your bladder until you urinate.
With retrograde ejaculation, the bladder neck muscle doesn't tighten properly. As a result, sperm can enter the bladder instead of being ejected out of your body through the penis.
Several conditions can cause problems with the muscle that closes the bladder during ejaculation. These include: Surgery, such as bladder neck surgery, retroperitoneal lymph node dissection surgery for testicular cancer or prostate surgery, Side effect of certain medications used to treat high blood pressure, prostate enlargement and depression, Nerve damage caused by a medical condition, such as diabetes, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease or a spinal cord injury.
A dry orgasm is the primary sign of retrograde ejaculation. But dry orgasm — the ejaculation of little or no semen — can also be caused by other conditions, including: Surgical removal of the prostate (prostatectomy), Surgical removal of the bladder (cystectomy), Radiation therapy to treat cancer in the pelvic area.
You're at increased risk of retrograde ejaculation if: You have diabetes or multiple sclerosis, You've had prostate or bladder surgery, You take certain drugs for high blood pressure or a mood disorder, You had a spinal cord injury.
Retrograde ejaculation isn't harmful. However, potential complications include: Inability to get a woman pregnant (male infertility), Less pleasurable orgasm due to worries about absent ejaculate.
Babies with Rett syndrome typically are born after a normal pregnancy and delivery. Most infants with Rett syndrome seem to grow and behave normally for the first six months. After that, signs and symptoms start to appear.
The most pronounced changes generally occur at 12 to 18 months of age, over a period of weeks or months. Symptoms and their severity can vary greatly from child to child.
Rett syndrome signs and symptoms include:
Slowed growth. Brain growth slows after birth. Smaller than normal head size (microcephaly) is usually the first sign that a child has Rett syndrome. As children get older, delayed growth in other parts of the body becomes evident.
Loss of normal movement and coordination. The first signs often include reduced hand control and a decreasing ability to crawl or walk normally. At first, this loss of abilities occurs rapidly and then it continues more gradually. Eventually muscles become weak or may become rigid or spastic with abnormal movement and positioning.
Loss of communication abilities. Children with Rett syndrome typically begin to lose the ability to speak, to make eye contact and to communicate in other ways. They may become disinterested in other people, toys and their surroundings. Some children have rapid changes, such as a sudden loss of speech. Over time, children may gradually regain eye contact and develop nonverbal communication skills.
Abnormal hand movements. Children with Rett syndrome typically develop repetitive, purposeless hand movements that may differ for each person. Hand movements may include hand-wringing, squeezing, clapping, tapping or rubbing.
Unusual eye movements. Children with Rett syndrome tend to have unusual eye movements, such as intense staring, blinking, crossed eyes or closing one eye at a time.
Breathing problems. These include breath-holding, abnormally rapid breathing (hyperventilation), forceful exhalation of air or saliva, and swallowing air. These problems tend to occur during waking hours, but breathing disturbances such as shallow breathing or periodic breathing can occur during sleep.
Irritability and crying. Children with Rett syndrome may become increasingly agitated and irritable as they get older. Periods of crying or screaming may begin suddenly, for no apparent reason, and last for hours. Some children may experience fears and anxiety.
Other abnormal behaviors. These may include, for example, sudden, odd facial expressions and long bouts of laughter, hand licking, and grasping of hair or clothing.
Cognitive disabilities. Loss of skills can be accompanied by a loss of intellectual functioning.
Seizures. Most people who have Rett syndrome experience seizures at some time during their lives. Multiple seizure types may occur and are accompanied by an abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG).
Abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Scoliosis is common with Rett syndrome. It typically begins between 8 and 11 years of age and increases with age. Surgery may be required if the curvature is severe.
Irregular heartbeat. This is a life-threatening problem for many children and adults with Rett syndrome and can result in sudden death.
Sleep disturbances. Abnormal sleep patterns can include irregular sleep times, falling asleep during the day and being awake at night, or waking in the night with crying or screaming.
     Other symptoms. A variety of other symptoms can occur, such as thin, fragile bones prone to factures; small hands and feet that are usually cold; problems with chewing and swallowing; problems with bowel function; and teeth grinding.
Rett syndrome is commonly divided into four stages:
Stage I: early onset. Signs and symptoms are subtle and easily overlooked during the first stage, which starts between 6 and 18 months of age and can last for a few months or a year. Babies in this stage may show less eye contact and start to lose interest in toys. They may also have delays in sitting or crawling.
Stage II: rapid deterioration. Starting between 1 and 4 years of age, children lose the ability to perform skills they previously had. This loss can be rapid or more gradual, occurring over weeks or months. Symptoms of Rett syndrome occur, such as slowed head growth, abnormal hand movements, hyperventilating, screaming or crying for no apparent reason, problems with movement and coordination, and a loss of social interaction and communication.
Stage III: plateau. The third stage usually begins between the ages of 2 and 10 years and can last for many years. Although problems with movement continue, behavior may have limited improvement, with less crying and irritability, and some improvement in hand use and communication. Seizures may begin in this stage and generally don't occur before the age of 2.
Stage IV: late motor deterioration. This stage usually begins after the age of 10 and can last for years or decades. It's marked by reduced mobility, muscle weakness, joint contractures and scoliosis. Understanding, communication and hand skills generally remain stable or improve slightly, and seizures may occur less often.
Signs and symptoms of Rett syndrome can be subtle in the early stages. See your child's doctor right away if you begin to notice physical problems or changes in behavior after apparently normal development, such as: Slowed growth of your child's head or other parts of the body, Decreased coordination or mobility, Repetitive hand movements, Decreasing eye contact or loss of interest in normal play, Delayed speech development or loss of previously acquired speech abilities, Problem behavior or marked mood swings, Any clear loss of previously gained milestones in gross motor or fine motor skills.
Rett syndrome is a rare genetic disorder. Classic Rett syndrome, as well as several variants with milder or more-severe symptoms, can occur based on the specific genetic mutation.
The genetic mutation that causes the disease occurs randomly, usually in the MECP2 gene. Only in a few cases is this genetic disorder inherited. The mutation appears to result in problems with the protein production critical for brain development. However, the exact cause is not fully understood and is still being studied.
Because males have a different chromosome combination from females, boys who have the genetic mutation that causes Rett syndrome are affected in devastating ways. Most of them die before birth or in early infancy.
A very small number of boys have a different mutation that results in a less destructive form of Rett syndrome. Similar to girls with Rett syndrome, these boys will likely live to adulthood, but they're still at risk of a number of intellectual and developmental problems.
Rett syndrome is rare. The genetic mutations known to cause the disease are random, and no risk factors have been identified. In a few cases, inherited factors — for instance, having close family members with Rett syndrome — may play a role.
Complications of Rett syndrome include: Sleep problems that cause significant sleep disruption to the person with Rett syndrome and family members, Difficulty eating, leading to poor nutrition and delayed growth, Bowel and bladder problems, such as constipation, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), bowel or urinary incontinence, and gallbladder disease, Pain that may accompany problems such as gastrointestinal issues or bone fractures, Muscle, bone and joint problems, Anxiety and problem behavior that may hinder social functioning, Needing lifelong care and assistance with activities of daily living, Shortened life span — although most people with Rett syndrome live into adulthood, they may not live as long as the average person because of heart problems and other health complications.
In Reye's syndrome, a child's blood sugar level typically drops while the levels of ammonia and acidity in his or her blood rise. At the same time, the liver may swell and develop fatty deposits. Swelling may also occur in the brain, which can cause seizures, convulsions or loss of consciousness.
The signs and symptoms of Reye's syndrome typically appear about three to five days after the onset of a viral infection, such as the flu (influenza) or chickenpox, or an upper respiratory infection, such as a cold.
For children younger than age 2, the first signs of Reye's syndrome may include: Diarrhea, Rapid breathing.
For older children and teenagers, early signs and symptoms may include: Persistent or continuous vomiting, Unusual sleepiness or lethargy.
As the condition progresses, signs and symptoms may become more serious, including: Irritable, aggressive or irrational behavior, Confusion, disorientation or hallucinations, Weakness or paralysis in the arms and legs, Seizures, Excessive lethargy, Decreased level of consciousness.
These signs and symptoms require emergency treatment.
Early diagnosis and treatment of Reye's syndrome can save a child's life. If you suspect that your child has Reye's syndrome, it's important to act quickly.
Seek emergency medical help if your child: Has seizures or convulsions, Loses consciousness.
Contact your child's doctor if your child experiences the following after a bout with the flu or chickenpox: Vomits repeatedly, Becomes unusually sleepy or lethargic, Has sudden behavior changes.
The exact cause of Reye's syndrome is unknown, although several factors may play a role in its development. Reye's syndrome seems to be triggered by using aspirin to treat a viral illness or infection — particularly flu (influenza) and chickenpox — in children and teenagers who have an underlying fatty acid oxidation disorder.
Fatty acid oxidation disorders are a group of inherited metabolic disorders in which the body is unable to break down fatty acids because an enzyme is missing or not working properly. A screening test is needed to determine if your child has a fatty acid oxidation disorder.
In some cases, the symptoms and signs of Reye's syndrome may be duplicated by an underlying metabolic condition unmasked by a viral illness. The most frequent of these rare disorders is medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency. Exposure to certain toxins — such as insecticides, herbicides and paint thinner — may produce symptoms similar to those of Reye's syndrome, but these toxins don't cause Reye's syndrome.
The following factors — usually when they occur together — may increase your child's risk of developing Reye's syndrome: Using aspirin to treat a viral infection, such as flu, chickenpox or an upper respiratory infection, Having an underlying fatty acid oxidation disorder.
Most children and teenagers who have Reye's syndrome survive, although varying degrees of permanent brain damage are possible. Without proper diagnosis and treatment, Reye's syndrome can be fatal within a few days.
Signs and symptoms of rhabdomyosarcoma depend on where the cancer is located.
For example, if the cancer is in the head or neck area, signs and symptoms may include, among others: Headache, Bulging or swelling of the eyes, Bleeding in the nose, throat or ears.
If the cancer is in the urinary or reproductive system, signs and symptoms may include, among others: Trouble urinating and blood in the urine, Difficulty with bowel movements, A mass or bleeding in the vagina or rectum.
If the cancer is in the arms or legs, signs and symptoms may include, among others: Swelling or a lump in the arm or leg, Pain in the affected area, though sometimes there is no pain.
It's not clear what causes rhabdomyosarcoma.
Doctors know that rhabdomyosarcoma begins when a cell develops changes in its DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The changes tell the cell to multiply quickly and to go on living when healthy cells would normally die. The result is a mass (tumor) of abnormal cells that can invade and destroy healthy body tissue. The abnormal cells can break away and spread (metastasize) throughout the body.
Factors that may increase the risk of rhabdomyosarcoma include:
Family history of cancer. The risk of rhabdomyosarcoma is higher in children with a blood relative, such as a parent or sibling, who has had cancer, particularly if that cancer occurred at a young age. But most children with rhabdomyosarcoma have no family history of cancer.
Genetic syndromes that increase the risk of cancer. In rare instances, rhabdomyosarcoma has been linked to genetic syndromes that are passed from parents to children, including neurofibromatosis 1, Noonan syndrome, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and Costello syndrome.
Complications of rhabdomyosarcoma and its treatment include:
Cancer that spreads (metastasizes). Rhabdomyosarcoma can spread from where it started to other areas, making treatment and recovery more difficult. Rhabdomyosarcoma most often spreads to the lungs, lymph nodes and bones.
Long-term treatment side effects. The aggressive treatments needed to control rhabdomyosarcoma can cause substantial side effects, in both the short and the long terms. Your health care team can help you manage the side effects that happen during treatment and provide you with a list of side effects to watch for in the years after treatment.
Rheumatic fever symptoms vary. You can have few symptoms or several, and symptoms can change during the course of the disease. The onset of rheumatic fever usually occurs about two to four weeks after a strep throat infection.
Rheumatic fever signs and symptoms — which result from inflammation in the heart, joints, skin or central nervous system — can include: Fever, Painful and tender joints — most often in the knees, ankles, elbows and wrists, Pain in one joint that migrates to another joint, Red, hot or swollen joints, Small, painless bumps beneath the skin, Chest pain, Heart murmur, Fatigue, Flat or slightly raised, painless rash with a ragged edge, Jerky, uncontrollable body movements (Sydenham chorea) — most often in the hands, feet and face, Outbursts of unusual behavior, such as crying or inappropriate laughing, that accompanies Sydenham chorea.
Have your child see a doctor for signs or symptoms of strep throat, which include: Sore throat that comes on suddenly, Pain when swallowing, Fever, Headache, Stomach pain, nausea and vomiting.
Proper treatment of strep throat can prevent rheumatic fever. Also, have your child see a doctor if he or she shows other indications of rheumatic fever.
Rheumatic fever can occur after a throat infection from a bacteria called group A streptococcus. Group A streptococcus infections of the throat cause strep throat or, less commonly, scarlet fever.
Group A streptococcus infections of the skin or other parts of the body rarely trigger rheumatic fever.
The link between strep infection and rheumatic fever isn't clear, but it appears that the bacteria trick the immune system.
The strep bacteria contain a protein similar to one found in certain tissues of the body. The body's immune system, which normally targets infection-causing bacteria, attacks its own tissue, particularly tissues of the heart, joints, skin and central nervous system. This immune system reaction results in swelling of the tissues (inflammation).
If your child receives prompt treatment with an antibiotic to eliminate strep bacteria and takes all medication as prescribed, there's little chance of developing rheumatic fever.
If your child has one or more episodes of strep throat or scarlet fever that aren't treated or aren't treated completely, he or she might develop rheumatic fever.
Factors that can increase the risk of rheumatic fever include:
Family history. Some people carry a gene or genes that might make them more likely to develop rheumatic fever.
Type of strep bacteria. Certain strains of strep bacteria are more likely to contribute to rheumatic fever than are other strains.
Environmental factors. A greater risk of rheumatic fever is associated with overcrowding, poor sanitation and other conditions that can easily result in the rapid transmission or multiple exposures to strep bacteria.
Inflammation caused by rheumatic fever can last a few weeks to several months. In some cases, the inflammation causes long-term complications.
Rheumatic fever can cause permanent damage to the heart (rheumatic heart disease). It usually occurs 10 to 20 years after the original illness, but severe cases of rheumatic fever can cause damage to the heart valves while your child still has symptoms. Problems are most common with the valve between the two left chambers of the heart (mitral valve), but the other valves can be affected.
The damage can result in:
Narrowing of the valve. This decreases blood flow.
Leak in the valve. A leaky valve causes blood to flow in the wrong direction.
Damage to heart muscle. The inflammation associated with rheumatic fever can weaken the heart muscle, affecting its ability to pump.
Damage to the mitral valve, other heart valves or other heart tissues can cause problems with the heart later in life. Resulting conditions can include: An irregular and chaotic heartbeat (atrial fibrillation), Heart failure.
Signs and symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis may include: Tender, warm, swollen joints, Joint stiffness that is usually worse in the mornings and after inactivity, Fatigue, fever and loss of appetite.
Early rheumatoid arthritis tends to affect your smaller joints first — particularly the joints that attach your fingers to your hands and your toes to your feet.
As the disease progresses, symptoms often spread to the wrists, knees, ankles, elbows, hips and shoulders. In most cases, symptoms occur in the same joints on both sides of your body.
About 40 percent of the people who have rheumatoid arthritis also experience signs and symptoms that don't involve the joints. Rheumatoid arthritis can affect many nonjoint structures, including: Skin, Eyes, Lungs, Heart, Kidneys, Salivary glands, Nerve tissue, Bone marrow, Blood vessels.
Rheumatoid arthritis signs and symptoms may vary in severity and may even come and go. Periods of increased disease activity, called flares, alternate with periods of relative remission — when the swelling and pain fade or disappear. Over time, rheumatoid arthritis can cause joints to deform and shift out of place.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have persistent discomfort and swelling in your joints.
Rheumatoid arthritis occurs when your immune system attacks the synovium — the lining of the membranes that surround your joints.
The resulting inflammation thickens the synovium, which can eventually destroy the cartilage and bone within the joint.
The tendons and ligaments that hold the joint together weaken and stretch. Gradually, the joint loses its shape and alignment.
Doctors don't know what starts this process, although a genetic component appears likely. While your genes don't actually cause rheumatoid arthritis, they can make you more susceptible to environmental factors — such as infection with certain viruses and bacteria — that may trigger the disease.
Factors that may increase your risk of rheumatoid arthritis include:
Your sex. Women are more likely than men to develop rheumatoid arthritis.
Age. Rheumatoid arthritis can occur at any age, but it most commonly begins in middle age.
Family history. If a member of your family has rheumatoid arthritis, you may have an increased risk of the disease.
Smoking. Cigarette smoking increases your risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis, particularly if you have a genetic predisposition for developing the disease. Smoking also appears to be associated with greater disease severity.
Environmental exposures. Although poorly understood, some exposures such as asbestos or silica may increase the risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis. Emergency workers exposed to dust from the collapse of the World Trade Center are at higher risk of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.
Obesity. People — especially women age 55 and younger — who are overweight or obese appear to be at a somewhat higher risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis.
Rheumatoid arthritis increases your risk of developing:
Osteoporosis. Rheumatoid arthritis itself, along with some medications used for treating rheumatoid arthritis, can increase your risk of osteoporosis — a condition that weakens your bones and makes them more prone to fracture.
Rheumatoid nodules. These firm bumps of tissue most commonly form around pressure points, such as the elbows. However, these nodules can form anywhere in the body, including the lungs.
Dry eyes and mouth. People who have rheumatoid arthritis are much more likely to experience Sjogren's syndrome, a disorder that decreases the amount of moisture in your eyes and mouth.
Infections. The disease itself and many of the medications used to combat rheumatoid arthritis can impair the immune system, leading to increased infections.
Abnormal body composition. The proportion of fat to lean mass is often higher in people who have rheumatoid arthritis, even in people who have a normal body mass index (BMI).
Carpal tunnel syndrome. If rheumatoid arthritis affects your wrists, the inflammation can compress the nerve that serves most of your hand and fingers.
Heart problems. Rheumatoid arthritis can increase your risk of hardened and blocked arteries, as well as inflammation of the sac that encloses your heart.
Lung disease. People with rheumatoid arthritis have an increased risk of inflammation and scarring of the lung tissues, which can lead to progressive shortness of breath.
Lymphoma. Rheumatoid arthritis increases the risk of lymphoma, a group of blood cancers that develop in the lymph system.
Signs and symptoms of rickets can include: Delayed growth, Delayed motor skills, Pain in the spine, pelvis and legs, Muscle weakness.
Because rickets softens the areas of growing tissue at the ends of a child's bones (growth plates), it can cause skeletal deformities such as: Bowed legs or knock knees, Thickened wrists and ankles, Breastbone projection.
Talk to your doctor if your child develops bone pain, muscle weakness or obvious skeletal deformities.
Your child's body needs vitamin D to absorb calcium and phosphorus from food. Rickets can occur if your child's body doesn't get enough vitamin D or if his or her body has problems using vitamin D properly. Occasionally, not getting enough calcium or lack of calcium and vitamin D can cause rickets.
Children who don't get enough vitamin D from these two sources can develop a deficiency:
Sunlight. Your child's skin produces vitamin D when it's exposed to sunlight. But children in developed countries tend to spend less time outdoors. They're also more likely to use sunscreen, which blocks the sun's rays that trigger the skin's production of vitamin D.
Food. Fish oil, egg yolks and fatty fish such as salmon and mackerel contain vitamin D. Vitamin D has also been added to some foods and beverages, such as milk, cereal and some fruit juices.
Some children are born with or develop medical conditions that affect the way their bodies absorb vitamin D. Some examples include: Celiac disease, Inflammatory bowel disease, Cystic fibrosis, Kidney problems.
Factors that can increase a child's risk of rickets include:
Dark skin. Dark skin has more of the pigment melanin, which lowers the skin's ability to produce vitamin D from sunlight.
Mother's vitamin D deficiency during pregnancy. A baby born to a mother with severe vitamin D deficiency can be born with signs of rickets or develop them within a few months after birth.
Northern latitudes. Children who live in geographical locations where there is less sunshine are at higher risk of rickets.
Premature birth. Babies born before their due dates tend have lower levels of vitamin D because they had less time to receive the vitamin from their mothers in the womb.
Medications. Certain types of anti-seizure medications and antiretroviral medications, used to treat HIV infections, appear to interfere with the body's ability to use vitamin D.
Exclusive breast-feeding. Breast milk doesn't contain enough vitamin D to prevent rickets. Babies who are exclusively breast-fed should receive vitamin D drops.
Left untreated, rickets can lead to: Failure to grow, An abnormally curved spine, Bone deformities, Dental defects, Seizures.
Signs and symptoms of ringworm may include: A scaly ring-shaped area, typically on the buttocks, trunk, arms and legs, May itch, A clear or scaly area inside the ring, perhaps with a scattering of red bumps, Slightly raised, expanding rings, A round, flat patch of itchy skin, Overlapping rings.
Talk to your doctor if you have a rash that doesn't begin to improve within two weeks of using an over-the-counter antifungal product. You may need prescription medication.
Ringworm is a contagious fungal infection caused by common mold-like parasites that live on the cells in the outer layer of your skin. It can be spread in the following ways:
Human to human. Ringworm often spreads by direct, skin-to-skin contact with an infected person.
Animal to human. You can contract ringworm by touching an animal with ringworm. Ringworm can spread while petting or grooming dogs or cats. It's also fairly common in cows.
Object to human. It's possible for ringworm to spread by contact with objects or surfaces that an infected person or animal has recently touched or rubbed against, such as clothing, towels, bedding and linens, combs, and brushes.
Soil to human. In rare cases, ringworm can be spread to humans by contact with infected soil. Infection would most likely occur only from prolonged contact with highly infected soil.
You're at higher risk of ringworm of the body if you: Live in a warm climate, Have close contact with an infected person or animal, Share clothing, bedding or towels with someone who has a fungal infection, Participate in sports that feature skin-to-skin contact, such as wrestling, Wear tight or restrictive clothing, Have a weak immune system.
A fungal infection rarely spreads below the surface of the skin to cause serious illness. But people with weak immune systems, such as those with HIV/AIDS, may find it difficult to get rid of the infection.
The signs and symptoms of ringworm of the scalp include: One or more round patches of scaly skin where the hair has broken off at or just above the scalp, Patches that slowly expand or enlarge, Scaly, gray or reddened areas, Patches that have small black dots where the hair has broken off at the scalp, Brittle or fragile hair that easily pulls out, Tender or painful areas on the scalp<.
When to see a doctor
Several conditions affecting the scalp may have a similar appearance. See your child's doctor if your child has any hair loss, scaling or itchiness of the scalp, or other unusual appearance of the scalp. It's important to get an accurate diagnosis and prompt, appropriate treatment.
Ringworm of the scalp is caused by one of several varieties of mold-like fungi called dermatophytes. The fungi attack the outer layer of skin on the scalp and the hair shaft.
Ringworm isn't caused by a worm. The common name for the disorder refers to the ring-like or circular appearance of the infection on the skin.
Ringworm is contagious and can spread in the following ways:
Human to human. Ringworm often spreads through direct skin-to-skin contact with an infected person.
Object to human. Ringworm can spread through contact with objects or surfaces that an infected person or animal has touched, such as clothing, towels, bed linens, combs or brushes.
Animal to human. Dogs and cats, especially puppies and kittens, are often carriers of ringworm. Other animals that are often carriers of the fungi include cows, goats, pigs and horses. Your child can contract ringworm by grooming or petting an animal with ringworm.
The fungi that cause ringworm of the scalp can cause other infections on the body. These infections are generally classified by the part of the body affected. They include:
Ringworm of the body (tinea corporis). This form causes a red, scaly ring or circle of rash on the top layer of your skin.
Athlete's foot (tinea pedis). This form of ringworm affects the moist areas between your toes and sometimes on the foot itself.
Jock itch (tinea cruris). This form affects your genitals, inner upper thighs and buttocks.
Risk factors for ringworm of the scalp include:
Age. Ringworm of the scalp is most common in toddlers and school-age children.
Exposure to other children. Outbreaks of ringworm are common in schools and child care centers where the infection easily spreads through close physical contact.
Exposure to pets. A pet, such as a cat or dog, can have the infection without showing any signs. Children can get the infection by touching or petting the animal.
In some cases, ringworm of the scalp causes kerion — a severe, painful inflammation of the scalp. Kerion appears as soft, raised swellings that drain pus and cause thick, yellow crusting on the scalp.
Instead of breaking, the hair falls out or can be easily pulled out. Kerion may be caused by an overly vigorous reaction to the fungus and can lead to permanent scars and hair loss.
Although many people become ill within the first week after infection, signs and symptoms may not appear for up to 14 days. Initial signs and symptoms of Rocky Mountain spotted fever often are nonspecific and can mimic those of other illnesses: High fever, Chills, Severe headache, Muscle aches, Nausea and vomiting, Confusion or other neurological changes.
The red, nonitchy rash associated with Rocky Mountain spotted fever typically appears three to five days after the initial signs and symptoms begin. The rash usually makes its first appearance on your wrists and ankles, and can spread in both directions — down into the palms of your hands and the soles of your feet, and up your arms and legs to your torso.
Some people who are infected with Rocky Mountain spotted fever don't ever develop a rash, which makes diagnosis much more difficult.
See your doctor if you develop a rash or become sick after a tick bite. Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other infectious diseases carried by ticks can progress rapidly and may be life-threatening. If available, take the tick along with you to your doctor's office for laboratory identification.
Rocky Mountain spotted fever is caused by infection with the organism Rickettsia rickettsii. Ticks carrying R. rickettsii are the most common source of infection.
If an infected tick attaches itself to your skin and feeds on your blood for six to 10 hours, you may pick up the infection. But you may never see the tick on you.
Rocky Mountain spotted fever primarily occurs when ticks are most active and during warm weather when people tend to spend more time outdoors. Rocky Mountain spotted fever cannot be spread from person to person.
Factors that may increase your risk of contracting Rocky Mountain spotted fever include: Living in an area where the disease is common, The time of year — infections are more common in the spring and early summer, How much time you spend in grassy or wooded areas, Whether you have a dog or spend time with dogs.
If an infected tick attaches to your skin, you can contract Rocky Mountain spotted fever when you remove it, as fluid from the tick can enter your body through an opening such as the bite site.
You can reduce your risk of infection by taking steps to prevent exposure to ticks and tick fluids.  When removing a tick from your skin: Use a tweezers to grasp the tick near its head or mouth and remove it carefully, Treat the tick as if it's contaminated; soak it in alcohol or flush it down the toilet, Clean the bite area with antiseptic, Wash your hands thoroughly.
Rocky Mountain spotted fever damages the lining of your smallest blood vessels, causing the vessels to leak or form clots. This may cause:
Inflammation of the brain (encephalitis). In addition to severe headaches, Rocky Mountain spotted fever can cause inflammation of the brain, which can cause confusion, seizures and delirium.
Inflammation of the heart or lungs. Rocky Mountain spotted fever can cause inflammation in areas of the heart and lungs. This can lead to heart failure or lung failure in severe cases.
Kidney failure. Your kidneys filter waste from your blood, and the blood vessels within the kidneys are very small and fragile. Damage to these vessels can eventually result in kidney failure.
Serious infection, possibly amputation. Some of your smallest blood vessels are in your fingers and toes. If these vessels don't work properly, the tissue at your farthest extremities may develop gangrene and die. Amputation would then be necessary.
Death. Untreated, Rocky Mountain spotted fever has, historically, had a death rate as high as 80 percent.
Signs and symptoms of rosacea include:
Facial redness. Rosacea usually causes a persistent redness in the central part of your face. Small blood vessels on your nose and cheeks often swell and become visible.
Swollen, red bumps. Many people with rosacea also develop pimples on their face that resemble acne. These bumps sometimes contain pus. Your skin may feel hot and tender.
Eye problems. Many people with rosacea also experience dry, irritated, swollen eyes and red, swollen eyelids. This is known as ocular rosacea. In some people, the eye symptoms precede the skin symptoms.
Enlarged nose. Over time, rosacea can thicken the skin on the nose, causing the nose to appear bulbous (rhinophyma). This occurs more often in men than in women.
If you experience persistent redness of your face, see your doctor or a skin specialist (dermatologist) for a diagnosis and proper treatment.
The cause of rosacea is unknown, but it could be due to a combination of hereditary and environmental factors. Rosacea is not caused by poor hygiene.
A number of factors can trigger flare-ups, including: Hot drinks and spicy foods, Red wine and other alcoholic beverages, Temperature extremes, Sunlight or wind, Emotions, Exercise, Drugs that dilate blood vessels, including some blood pressure medications, Various cosmetic products.
Anyone can develop rosacea. But you may be more likely to develop it if you: Are female, Have light skin, particularly if it has been damaged by the sun, Are over age 30, Smoke, Have a family history of rosacea.
Over time, the oil glands (sebaceous glands) in your nose and sometimes your cheeks become enlarged, resulting in a buildup of tissue on and around your nose — a condition called rhinophyma (rie-no-FIE-muh). This complication is much more common in men and develops slowly over a period of years.
If your child is exposed to someone with roseola and becomes infected with the virus, it generally takes a week or two for signs and symptoms of infection to appear — if they appear at all. It's possible to become infected with roseola, but have signs and symptoms too mild to be readily noticeable. Roseola symptoms may include:
Fever. Roseola typically starts with a sudden, high fever — often greater than 103 F (39.4 C). Some children also may have a sore throat, runny nose or cough along with or preceding the fever. Your child may also develop swollen lymph nodes in his or her neck along with the fever. The fever lasts three to five days.
Rash. Once the fever subsides, a rash typically appears — but not always. The rash consists of many small pink spots or patches. These spots are generally flat, but some may be raised. There may be a white ring around some of the spots. The rash usually starts on the chest, back and abdomen and then spreads to the neck and arms. It may or may not reach the legs and face. The rash, which isn't itchy or uncomfortable, can last from several hours to several days before fading.
Other signs and symptoms of roseola may include: Irritability in infants and children, Mild diarrhea, Decreased appetite, Swollen eyelids.
Your child could have a convulsion (febrile seizure) if his or her fever becomes high or spikes quickly. However, usually by the time you notice your child's high temperature, the threat of a possible seizure has already passed. If your child does have an unexplained seizure, seek medical care immediately.
Call your child's doctor if: Your child has a fever greater than 103 F (39.4 C), Your child has roseola and the fever lasts more than seven days, The rash doesn't improve after three days.
If your immune system is compromised and you come in contact with someone who has roseola, contact your doctor. You may need monitoring for a possible infection that, for you, could be more severe than it is for a child.
The most common cause of roseola is the human herpes virus 6, but the cause also can be another herpes virus — human herpes virus 7.
Like other viral illnesses, such as a common cold, roseola spreads from person to person through contact with an infected person's respiratory secretions or saliva. For example, a healthy child who shares a cup with a child who has roseola could contract the virus.
Roseola is contagious even if no rash is present. That means the condition can spread while an infected child has only a fever, even before it's clear that the child has roseola. Watch for signs of roseola if your child has interacted with another child who has the illness.
Unlike chickenpox and other childhood viral illnesses that spread rapidly, roseola rarely results in a communitywide outbreak. The infection can occur at any time of the year.
Older infants are at greatest risk of acquiring roseola because they haven't had time yet to develop their own antibodies against many viruses. While in the uterus, babies receive antibodies from their mothers that protect them as newborns from contracting infections, such as roseola. But this immunity decreases with time. The most common age for a child to contract roseola is between 6 and 15 months.
Occasionally a child with roseola experiences a seizure brought on by a rapid rise in body temperature. If this happens, your child might briefly lose consciousness and jerk his or her arms, legs or head for several seconds to minutes. He or she may also lose bladder or bowel control temporarily.
If your child has a seizure, seek emergency care. Although frightening, fever-related seizures in otherwise healthy young children are generally short-lived and are rarely harmful.
Complications from roseola are rare. The vast majority of otherwise healthy children and adults with roseola recover quickly and completely.
Roseola is of greater concern in people whose immune systems are compromised, such as those who have recently received a bone marrow or organ transplant. They may contract a new case of roseola — or a previous infection may come back while their immune system is weakened. Because they have less resistance to viruses in general, immune-compromised people tend to develop more-severe cases of infection and have a harder time fighting off illness.
People with weak immune systems who contract roseola may experience potentially serious complications from the infection, such as pneumonia or encephalitis — a potentially life-threatening inflammation of the brain.
The pain associated with a rotator cuff injury may: Be described as a dull ache deep in the shoulder, Disturb sleep, Make it difficult to comb your hair or reach behind your back, Be accompanied by arm weakness.
Shoulder pain that is short-lived may be evaluated by your family doctor. See your doctor right away if you have immediate weakness in your arm after an injury.
Rotator cuff disease may be the result of either a substantial injury to the shoulder or to progressive degeneration or wear and tear of the tendon tissue. Repetitive overhead activity or heavy lifting over a prolonged period of time may irritate or damage the tendon.
The following factors may increase your risk of having a rotator cuff injury:
Age. As you get older, your risk of a rotator cuff injury increases. Rotator cuff tears are most common in people older than 60.
Construction jobs. Occupations such as carpentry or house painting require repetitive arm motions, often overhead, that can damage the rotator cuff over time.
Family history. There may be a genetic component involved with rotator cuff injuries as they appear to occur more commonly in certain families.
Without treatment, rotator cuff problems may lead to permanent loss of motion or weakness, and may result in progressive degeneration of the shoulder joint. Although resting your shoulder is necessary for your recovery, keeping your shoulder immobilized for a prolonged time can cause the connective tissue enclosing the joint to become thickened and tight (frozen shoulder).
A rotavirus infection usually starts within two days of exposure to the virus. Initial symptoms are a fever and vomiting, followed by three to eight days of watery diarrhea. The infection can cause abdominal pain as well.
In adults who are otherwise healthy, a rotavirus infection may cause only mild signs and symptoms or none at all.
Call your child's doctor if your child: Has diarrhea for more than 24 hours, Has frequent episodes of vomiting, Has black or tarry stool or stool containing blood or pus, Has a temperature of 104 F (40 C) or higher, Seems lethargic, irritable or in pain, Has signs or symptoms of dehydration, including dry mouth, crying without tears, little or no urination, unusual sleepiness, or unresponsiveness.
If you're an adult, call your doctor if you: Can't keep liquids down for 24 hours, Have diarrhea for more than two days, Have blood in your vomit or bowel movements, Have a temperature higher than 103 F (39.4 C), Have signs or symptoms of dehydration, including excessive thirst, dry mouth, little or no urination, severe weakness, dizziness on standing, or lightheadedness.
Rotavirus is present in an infected person's stool several days before symptoms appear and for up to 10 days after symptoms subside. The virus spreads easily through hand-to-mouth contact throughout this time — even if the infected person doesn't have symptoms.
If you have rotavirus and you don't wash your hands after using the toilet — or your child has rotavirus and you don't wash your hands after changing your child's diaper or helping your child use the toilet — the virus can spread to anything you touch, including food, toys and utensils. If another person touches your unwashed hands or a contaminated object and then touches his or her mouth, an infection may follow. The virus can remain infectious on surfaces for weeks or longer if the area isn't disinfected.
Because there are many types of rotavirus, it's possible to be infected more than once, even if you've been vaccinated. However, repeat infections are typically less severe.
Rotavirus infections are common in children ages 3 to 35 months — particularly those who spend time in child care settings. Older adults and adults caring for young children have an increased risk of infection as well.
In the United States, the risk of rotavirus is highest in winter and spring.
Severe diarrhea can lead to dehydration, particularly in young children. Left untreated, dehydration can become a life-threatening condition regardless of its cause.
The signs and symptoms of rubella are often difficult to notice, especially in children. Signs and symptoms generally appear between two and three weeks after exposure to the virus. They usually last about one to five days and may include: Mild fever of 102 F (38.9 C) or lower, Headache, Stuffy or runny nose, Inflamed, red eyes, Enlarged, tender lymph nodes at the base of the skull, the back of the neck and behind the ears, A fine, pink rash that begins on the face and quickly spreads to the trunk and then the arms and legs, before disappearing in the same sequence, Aching joints, especially in young women.
Contact your doctor if you think you or your child may have been exposed to rubella or if you have the signs or symptoms listed above.
If you're considering getting pregnant, check your vaccination record to make sure you've received your MMR vaccine. If you're pregnant and you develop rubella, especially during your first trimester, the virus can cause death or serious birth defects in the developing fetus. Rubella during pregnancy is the most common cause of congenital deafness. It's best to be protected against rubella before pregnancy.
If you're pregnant, you'll likely undergo a routine screening for immunity to rubella. But if you've never received the vaccine and you think you might have been exposed to rubella, contact your doctor immediately. A blood test might confirm that you're already immune.
Rubella is caused by a virus that's passed from person to person. It can spread when an infected person coughs or sneezes. It can also spread by direct contact with an infected person's respiratory secretions, such as mucus. It can also be passed on from pregnant women to their unborn children via the bloodstream.
A person who has been infected with the virus that causes rubella is contagious for one to two weeks before the onset of the rash until about one or two weeks after the rash disappears. An infected person can spread the illness before the person realizes he or she has it.
Rubella is rare in many countries because most children receive a vaccination against the infection at an early age. In some parts of the world, the virus is still active. This is something to consider before going abroad, especially if you're pregnant.
Rubella is a mild infection. Once you've had the disease, you're usually permanently immune. Some women who have had rubella experience arthritis in the fingers, wrists and knees, which generally lasts for about one month. In rare cases, rubella can cause an ear infection or inflammation of the brain.
However, if you're pregnant when you contract rubella, the consequences for your unborn child may be severe, and in some cases, fatal. Up to 80% of infants born to mothers who had rubella during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy develop congenital rubella syndrome. This syndrome can cause one or more problems, including: Growth delays, Cataracts, Deafness, Congenital heart defects, Defects in other organs, Intellectual disabilities.
The highest risk to the fetus is during the first trimester, but exposure later in pregnancy also is dangerous.
Effortless regurgitation, typically within 10 minutes of eating, Abdominal pain or pressure relieved by regurgitation, A feeling of fullness, Bad breath, Nausea, Unintentional weight loss.
Rumination syndrome isn't usually associated with retching.
Consult a doctor if you or your child persistently regurgitates food.
The precise cause of rumination syndrome isn't clear. But it appears to be caused by an increase in abdominal pressure.
Rumination syndrome is frequently confused with bulimia nervosa, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and gastroparesis. Some people have rumination syndrome linked to a rectal evacuation disorder, in which poor coordination of pelvic floor muscles leads to chronic constipation.
The condition has long been known to occur in infants and people with developmental disabilities. It's now clear that the condition isn't related to age, as it can occur in children, teens and adults. Rumination syndrome is more likely to occur in people with anxiety, depression or other psychiatric disorders.
Untreated, rumination syndrome can damage the tube between your mouth and stomach (esophagus).
Rumination syndrome can also cause: Unhealthy weight loss, Malnutrition, Dental erosion, Bad breath, Embarrassment, Social isolation.
Signs and symptoms of a ruptured eardrum may include: Ear pain that may subside quickly, Mucuslike, pus-filled or bloody drainage from your ear, Hearing loss, Ringing in your ear (tinnitus), Spinning sensation (vertigo), Nausea or vomiting that can result from vertigo.
Call your doctor if you experience signs or symptoms of a ruptured eardrum. Your middle and inner ears are made up of delicate structures that are sensitive to injury or disease. It is important to try to figure out the cause of your ear symptoms and determine whether a ruptured eardrum has occurred.
Causes of a ruptured (perforated) eardrum may include:
Middle ear infection (otitis media). A middle ear infection often results in the accumulation of fluids in your middle ear. Pressure from these fluids can cause the eardrum to rupture.
Barotrauma. Barotrauma is stress exerted on your eardrum when the air pressure in your middle ear and the air pressure in the environment are out of balance. If the pressure is severe, your eardrum can rupture. Barotrauma is most often caused by air pressure changes associated with air travel.
Other events that can cause sudden changes in pressure — and possibly a ruptured eardrum — include scuba diving and a direct blow to the ear, such as the impact of an automobile air bag.
Loud sounds or blasts (acoustic trauma). A loud sound or blast, as from an explosion or gunshot — essentially an overpowering sound wave — can rarely cause a tear in your eardrum.
Foreign objects in your ear. Small objects, such as a cotton swab or hairpin, can puncture or tear the eardrum.
Severe head trauma. Severe injury, such as a skull base fracture, may cause the dislocation of or damage to middle and inner ear structures, including your eardrum.
Your eardrum (tympanic membrane) has two primary roles:
Hearing. When sound waves strike it, your eardrum vibrates — the first step by which structures of your middle and inner ears translate sound waves into nerve impulses.
Protection. Your eardrum also acts as a barrier, protecting your middle ear from water, bacteria and other foreign substances.
If your eardrum ruptures, uncommon problems can occur, especially if it fails to self-heal after three to six months. Possible complications include:
Hearing loss. Usually, hearing loss is temporary, lasting only until the tear or hole in your eardrum has healed. The size and location of the tear can affect the degree of hearing loss.
Middle ear infection (otitis media). A ruptured (perforated) eardrum can allow bacteria to enter the ear. If a perforated eardrum doesn't heal, a small number of people may be vulnerable to ongoing (recurrent or chronic) infections. In this small group, chronic drainage and hearing loss can occur.
Middle ear cyst (cholesteatoma). Although very rare, this cyst, which is composed of skin cells and other debris, can develop in your middle ear as a long-term result of eardrum rupture.
Ear canal debris normally travels to your outer ear with the help of ear-protecting earwax. If your eardrum is ruptured, the skin debris can pass into your middle ear and form a cyst.
A cyst in your middle ear provides a friendly environment for bacteria and contains proteins that can damage the bones of your middle ear.
Signs and symptoms of a ruptured spleen include: Pain in the upper left abdomen, Tenderness when you touch the upper left abdomen, Left shoulder pain, Confusion, lightheadedness or dizziness.
A ruptured spleen is a medical emergency. Seek emergency care after an injury if your signs and symptoms indicate you may have a ruptured spleen.
A spleen can rupture due to:
Injury to the left side of the body. A ruptured spleen is typically caused by a blow to the left upper abdomen or the left lower chest, such as might happen during sporting mishaps, fistfights and car crashes. An injured spleen can rupture soon after the abdominal trauma or, in some cases, days or weeks after the injury.
An enlarged spleen. Your spleen can become enlarged when blood cells accumulate in the spleen. An enlarged spleen can be caused by various underlying problems, such as mononucleosis and other infections, liver disease, and blood cancers.
A ruptured spleen can cause life-threatening bleeding into your abdominal cavity.
A sacral dimple consists of an indentation, or "pit," in the skin on the lower back, just above the crease between the buttocks.
A sacral dimple is a congenital condition, meaning it's present at birth. There are no known causes.
Rarely, sacral dimples are associated with a serious underlying abnormality of the spine or spinal cord. Examples include:
Spina bifida. A very mild form of this condition, called spina bifida occulta, occurs when the spine doesn't close properly around the spinal cord but the cord remains within the spinal canal. In most cases, spina bifida occulta causes no symptoms.
Tethered cord syndrome. The spinal cord normally hangs freely within the spinal canal. Tethered cord syndrome is a disorder that occurs when tissue attached to the spinal cord limits its movements. Signs and symptoms may include weakness or numbness in the legs and bladder or bowel incontinence.
The risks of these spinal problems increase if the sacral dimple is accompanied by a nearby tuft of hair, skin tag or certain types of skin discoloration.
The pain associated with sacroiliitis most commonly occurs in the buttocks and lower back. It can also affect the legs, groin and even the feet. Sacroiliitis pain can be aggravated by: Prolonged standing, Bearing more weight on one leg than the other, Stair climbing, Running, Taking large strides.
Causes for sacroiliac joint dysfunction include:
Traumatic injury. A sudden impact, such as a motor vehicle accident or a fall, can damage your sacroiliac joints.
Arthritis. Wear-and-tear arthritis (osteoarthritis) can occur in sacroiliac joints, as can ankylosing spondylitis — a type of inflammatory arthritis that affects the spine.
Pregnancy. The sacroiliac joints must loosen and stretch to accommodate childbirth. The added weight and altered gait during pregnancy can cause additional stress on these joints and can lead to abnormal wear.
Infection. In rare cases, the sacroiliac joint can become infected.
As with other conditions that cause chronic pain, sacroiliitis can result in depression and insomnia.
Signs and symptoms of a salivary gland tumor may include: A lump or swelling on or near your jaw or in your neck or mouth, Numbness in part of your face, Muscle weakness on one side of your face, Persistent pain in the area of a salivary gland, Difficulty swallowing, Trouble opening your mouth widely.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
Having a lump or an area of swelling near your salivary gland is the most common sign of a salivary gland tumor, but it doesn't mean you have cancer. Most salivary gland tumors are noncancerous (benign). Many other noncancerous conditions may lead to a swollen salivary gland, including an infection or a stone in a salivary gland duct.
Salivary gland tumors are rare. Their cause isn't clear.
Salivary gland tumors begin when some cells in a salivary gland develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do.
The changes tell the cells to grow and divide rapidly. The abnormal cells go on living when healthy cells would die. The accumulating cells form a tumor.
If additional changes happen in the DNA, the abnormal cells may become cancerous. Cancer cells can invade and destroy nearby tissue. They can also break away from the tumor and spread (metastasize) to distant areas of the body.
Many different types of salivary gland tumors exist. Doctors classify salivary gland tumors based on the type of cells involved in the tumors. Knowing the type of salivary gland tumor you have helps your doctor determine which treatment options are best for you.
Types of noncancerous (benign) salivary gland tumors include: Pleomorphic adenoma, Basal cell adenoma, Canalicular adenoma, Oncocytoma, Warthin tumor.
Types of cancerous (malignant) salivary gland tumors include:
Factors that may increase your risk of salivary gland tumors include:
Older age. Though salivary gland tumors can occur at any age, they most commonly occur in older adults.
Radiation exposure. Radiation treatments for cancer, such as radiation used to treat head and neck cancers, may increase the risk of salivary gland tumors.
Workplace exposure to certain substances. People who work with certain substances may have an increased risk of salivary gland tumors. Jobs associated with salivary gland tumors include those involved in rubber manufacturing, asbestos mining and plumbing.
Salmonella infection is usually caused by eating raw or undercooked meat, poultry, eggs or egg products. The incubation period ranges from several hours to two days. Most salmonella infections can be classified as stomach flu (gastroenteritis). Possible signs and symptoms include: Nausea, Vomiting, Abdominal cramps, Diarrhea, Fever, Chills, Headache, Blood in the stool.
Signs and symptoms of salmonella infection generally last two to seven days. Diarrhea may last up to 10 days, although it may take several months before bowels return to normal.
A few varieties of salmonella bacteria result in typhoid fever, a sometimes deadly disease that is more common in developing countries.
Salmonella bacteria live in the intestines of people, animals and birds. Most people are infected with salmonella by eating foods that have been contaminated by feces. Commonly infected foods include:
Raw meat, poultry and seafood. Feces may get onto raw meat and poultry during the butchering process. Seafood may be contaminated if harvested from contaminated water.
Raw eggs. While an egg's shell may seem to be a perfect barrier to contamination, some infected chickens produce eggs that contain salmonella before the shell is even formed. Raw eggs are used in homemade versions of mayonnaise and hollandaise sauce.
Fruits and vegetables. Some fresh produce, particularly imported varieties, may be hydrated in the field or washed during processing with water contaminated with salmonella. Contamination also can occur in the kitchen, when juices from raw meat and poultry come into contact with uncooked foods, such as salads.
The Food and Drug Administration also indicates that some salmonella outbreaks have been traced to contaminants in spices. The agency is seeking ways to increase the safety of spices.
Many foods become contaminated when prepared by people who don't wash their hands thoroughly after using the toilet or changing a diaper. Infection also can occur if you touch something that is contaminated, including pets, especially birds and reptiles, and then put your fingers in your mouth.
Factors that may increase your risk of salmonella infection include activities that may bring you into closer contact with salmonella bacteria and health problems that may weaken your resistance to infection in general.
International travel. Salmonella infection, including varieties that cause typhoid fever, is more common in developing countries with poor sanitation.
Owning a pet bird or reptile. Some pets, particularly birds and reptiles, can carry salmonella bacteria.
Your body has many natural defenses against salmonella infection. For example, strong stomach acid can kill many types of salmonella bacteria. But some medical problems or medications can short-circuit these natural defenses. Examples include:
Antacids. Lowering your stomach's acidity allows more salmonella bacteria to survive.
Inflammatory bowel disease. This disorder damages the lining of your intestines, which makes it easier for salmonella bacteria to take hold.
Recent use of antibiotics. This can reduce the number of "good" bacteria in your intestines, which may impair your ability to fight off a salmonella infection.
The following medical problems or medications appear to increase your risk of contracting salmonella by impairing your immune system. AIDS, Sickle cell disease, Malaria, Anti-rejection drugs taken after organ transplants, Corticosteroids.
Salmonella infection usually isn't life-threatening. However, in certain people — especially infants and young children, older adults, transplant recipients, pregnant women, and people with weakened immune systems — the development of complications can be dangerous.
If you can't drink enough to replace the fluid you're losing from persistent diarrhea, you may become dehydrated. Warning signs include: Decreased urine output, Dry mouth and tongue, Sunken eyes, Reduced production of tears.
If salmonella infection enters your bloodstream (bacteremia), it can infect tissues throughout your body, including: The tissues surrounding your brain and spinal cord (meningitis), The lining of your heart or valves (endocarditis), Your bones or bone marrow (osteomyelitis), The lining of blood vessels, especially if you've had a vascular graft.
People who have had salmonella are at higher risk of developing reactive arthritis. Also known as Reiter's syndrome, reactive arthritis typically causes: Eye irritation, Painful urination, Painful joints.
Signs and symptoms of sarcoidosis vary depending on which organs are affected. Sarcoidosis sometimes develops gradually and produces symptoms that last for years. Other times, symptoms appear suddenly and then disappear just as quickly. Many people with sarcoidosis have no symptoms, so the disease may be discovered only when a chest X-ray is done for another reason.
Sarcoidosis can begin with these signs and symptoms: Fatigue, Swollen lymph nodes, Weight loss, Pain and swelling in joints, such as the ankles.
Sarcoidosis most often affects the lungs and may cause lung problems, such as: Persistent dry cough, Shortness of breath, Wheezing, Chest pain.
Sarcoidosis may cause skin problems, which may include: A rash of red or reddish-purple bumps, usually located on the shins or ankles, which may be warm and tender to the touch, Disfiguring sores (lesions) on the nose, cheeks and ears, Areas of skin that are darker or lighter in color, Growths under the skin (nodules), particularly around scars or tattoos.
Sarcoidosis can affect the eyes without causing any symptoms, so it's important to have your eyes checked regularly. When eye signs and symptoms do occur, they may include: Blurred vision, Eye pain, Burning, itching or dry eyes, Severe redness, Sensitivity to light.
Signs and symptoms related to cardiac sarcoidosis may include: Chest pain, Shortness of breath (dyspnea), Fainting (syncope), Fatigue, Irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias), Rapid or fluttering heart beat (palpitations), Swelling caused by excess fluid (edema).
Sarcoidosis can also affect calcium metabolism, the nervous system, the liver and spleen, muscles, bones and joints, the kidneys, lymph nodes, or any other organ.
See your doctor if you have signs and symptoms of sarcoidosis.
Doctors don't know the exact cause of sarcoidosis. Some people appear to have a genetic predisposition to develop the disease, which may be triggered by bacteria, viruses, dust or chemicals.
This triggers an overreaction of your immune system, and immune cells begin to collect in a pattern of inflammation called granulomas. As granulomas build up in an organ, the function of that organ can be affected.
While anyone can develop sarcoidosis, factors that may increase your risk include:
Age and sex. Sarcoidosis can occur at any age, but often occurs between the ages of 20 and 60 years. Women are slightly more likely to develop the disease.
Race. People of African descent and those of Northern European descent have a higher incidence of sarcoidosis. African-Americans are more likely to have involvement of other organs along with the lungs.
Family history. If someone in your family has had sarcoidosis, you're more likely to develop the disease.
Sometimes sarcoidosis causes long-term problems.
Lungs. Untreated pulmonary sarcoidosis can lead to permanent scarring in your lungs (pulmonary fibrosis), making it difficult to breathe and sometimes causing pulmonary hypertension.
Eyes. Inflammation can affect almost any part of your eye and may cause damage to the retina, which can eventually cause blindness. Rarely, sarcoidosis also can cause cataracts and glaucoma.
Kidneys. Sarcoidosis can affect how your body handles calcium, which can lead to kidney stones and reduce kidney function. Rarely, this can lead to kidney failure.
Heart. Cardiac sarcoidosis results in granulomas in your heart that can disrupt heart rhythm, blood flow and normal heart function. In rare instances, this may lead to death.
Nervous system. A small number of people with sarcoidosis develop problems related to the central nervous system when granulomas form in the brain and spinal cord. Inflammation in the facial nerves, for example, can cause facial paralysis.
Signs and symptoms of sarcoma include: A lump that can be felt through the skin that may or may not be painful, Bone pain, A broken bone that happens unexpectedly, such as with a minor injury or no injury at all, Abdominal pain, Weight loss.
It's not clear what causes most sarcomas.
In general, cancer forms when changes (mutations) happen in the DNA within cells. The DNA inside a cell is packaged into a large number of individual genes, each of which contains a set of instructions telling the cell what functions to perform, as well as how to grow and divide.
Mutations might tell cells to grow and divide uncontrollably and to continue living when normal cells would die. If this happens, the accumulating abnormal cells can form a tumor. Cells can break away and spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.
Factors that can increase the risk of sarcoma include:
Inherited syndromes. Some syndromes that increase the risk of cancer can be passed from parents to children. Examples of syndromes that increase the risk of sarcoma include familial retinoblastoma and neurofibromatosis type 1.
Radiation therapy for cancer. Radiation treatment for cancer increases the risk of developing a sarcoma later.
Chronic swelling (lymphedema). Lymphedema is swelling caused by a backup of lymph fluid that occurs when the lymphatic system is blocked or damaged. It increases the risk of a type of sarcoma called angiosarcoma.
Exposure to chemicals. Certain chemicals, such as some industrial chemicals and herbicides, can increase the risk of sarcoma that affects the liver.
Exposure to viruses. The virus called human herpesvirus 8 can increase the risk of a type of sarcoma called Kaposi's sarcoma in people with weakened immune systems.
Scabies signs and symptoms include: Itching, often severe and usually worse at night, Thin, irregular burrow tracks made up of tiny blisters or bumps on your skin.
The burrows or tracks typically appear in folds of skin. Though almost any part of the body may be involved, in adults and older children scabies is most often found: Between the fingers, In the armpits, Around the waist, Along the insides of the wrists, On the inner elbows, On the soles of the feet, Around the breasts, Around the male genital area, On the buttocks, On the knees.
In infants and young children, common sites of infestation usually include the: Scalp, Palms of the hands, Soles of the feet.
If you've had scabies before, signs and symptoms may develop within a few days of exposure. If you've never had scabies, it can take as long as six weeks for signs and symptoms to begin. You can still spread scabies even if you don't have any signs or symptoms yet.
Talk to your doctor if you have signs and symptoms that may indicate scabies.
Many skin conditions, such as dermatitis or eczema, are associated with itching and small bumps on the skin. Your doctor can help determine the exact cause and ensure that you receive proper treatment. Bathing and over-the-counter preparations may ease itching, but they won't eliminate scabies.
The eight-legged mite that causes scabies in humans is microscopic. The female mite burrows just beneath your skin and makes a tunnel where it deposits eggs.
The eggs hatch, and the mite larvae work their way to the surface of your skin, where they mature and can spread to other areas of your skin or to the skin of other people. The itching of scabies results from your body's allergic reaction to the mites, their eggs and their waste.
Close physical contact and, less often, the sharing of clothing or bedding with an infected person can spread the mites.
Animals and humans all are affected by their own distinct species of mites. Each species prefers one specific type of host and doesn't live long away from that preferred host.
Humans may have a temporary skin reaction from contact with the animal scabies mite. But people generally can't develop full-blown scabies from this source, as they might from contact with the human scabies mite.
Vigorous scratching can break your skin and allow a secondary bacterial infection, such as impetigo, to occur. Impetigo is a superficial infection of the skin that's caused most often by staph (staphylococci) bacteria or occasionally by strep (streptococci) bacteria.
A more severe form of scabies, called crusted scabies, may affect certain high-risk groups, including: People with chronic health conditions that weaken the immune system, such as HIV or chronic leukemia, People who are very ill, such as people in hospitals or nursing facilities, Older people in nursing homes.
Crusted scabies, also called Norwegian scabies, tends to make skin crusty and scaly, and affects large areas of the body. It's very contagious and can be hard to treat.
Normally, someone with scabies has about 10 to 15 mites. In contrast, someone with crusted scabies may be infested with millions of mites.
The signs and symptoms that give scarlet fever its name include:
Red rash. The rash looks like a sunburn and feels like sandpaper. It typically begins on the face or neck and spreads to the trunk, arms and legs. If pressure is applied to the reddened skin, it will turn pale.
Red lines. The folds of skin around the groin, armpits, elbows, knees and neck usually become a deeper red than the surrounding rash.
Flushed face. The face may appear flushed with a pale ring around the mouth.
Strawberry tongue. The tongue generally looks red and bumpy, and it's often covered with a white coating early in the disease.
The rash and the redness in the face and tongue usually last about a week. After these signs and symptoms have subsided, the skin affected by the rash often peels. Other signs and symptoms associated with scarlet fever include: Fever of 101 F (38.3 C) or higher, often with chills, Very sore and red throat, sometimes with white or yellowish patches, Difficulty swallowing, Enlarged glands in the neck (lymph nodes) that are tender to the touch, Nausea or vomiting, Headache.
Talk to your doctor if your child has a sore throat with: A fever of 102 F (38.9 C) or higher, Swollen or tender glands in the neck, A red rash.
Scarlet fever is caused by the same type of bacteria that cause strep throat. In scarlet fever, the bacteria release a toxin that produces the rash and red tongue.
The infection spreads from person to person via droplets expelled when an infected person coughs or sneezes. The incubation period — the time between exposure and illness — is usually two to four days.
Children 5 to 15 years of age are more likely than are other people to get scarlet fever. Scarlet fever germs spread more easily among people in close contact, such as family members or classmates.
If scarlet fever goes untreated, the bacteria may spread to the: Tonsils, Lungs, Skin, Kidneys, Blood, Middle ear.
Rarely, scarlet fever can lead to rheumatic fever, a serious condition that can affect the: Heart, Joints, Nervous system, Skin.
Schizoaffective disorder symptoms may vary from person to person. People with the condition experience psychotic symptoms, such as hallucinations or delusions, as well as symptoms of a mood disorder — either bipolar type (episodes of mania and sometimes depression) or depressive type (episodes of depression).
Although the development and course of schizoaffective disorder may vary, defining features include a major mood episode (depressed or manic mood) and at least a two-week period of psychotic symptoms when a major mood episode is not present.
Signs and symptoms of schizoaffective disorder depend on the type — bipolar or depressive type — and may include, among others: Delusions — having false, fixed beliefs, despite evidence to the contrary, Hallucinations, such as hearing voices or seeing things that aren't there, Impaired communication and speech, such as being incoherent, Bizarre or unusual behavior, Symptoms of depression, such as feeling empty, sad or worthless, Periods of manic mood, with an increase in energy and a decreased need for sleep over several days, and behaviors that are out of character, Impaired occupational, academic and social functioning, Problems with managing personal care, including cleanliness and physical appearance.
If you think someone you know may have schizoaffective disorder symptoms, talk to that person about your concerns. Although you can't force someone to seek professional help, you can offer encouragement and support and help find a qualified doctor or mental health professional.
If your loved one can't provide his or her own food, clothing or shelter, or if the safety of your loved one or others is a concern, you may need to call 911 or other emergency responders for help so that your loved one can be evaluated by a mental health professional.
Talk of suicide or suicidal behavior may occur in someone with schizoaffective disorder. If you have a loved one who is in danger of attempting suicide or has made a suicide attempt, make sure someone stays with that person. Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately. Or, if you can do so safely, take the person to the nearest hospital emergency room.
The exact causes of schizoaffective disorder are still being investigated, but genetics are likely a factor.
Factors that increase the risk of developing schizoaffective disorder include: Having a close blood relative — such as a parent or sibling — who has schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, Stressful events that may trigger symptoms, Taking mind-altering drugs, which may worsen symptoms when an underlying disorder is present.
People with schizoaffective disorder are at an increased risk of: Suicide, suicide attempts or suicidal thoughts, Social isolation, Family and interpersonal conflicts, Unemployment, Anxiety disorders, Alcohol or other substance use problems, Significant health problems, Poverty and homelessness.
If you have schizoid personality disorder, it's likely that you: Prefer being alone and choose to do activities alone, Don't want or enjoy close relationships, Feel little if any desire for sexual relationships, Feel like you can't experience pleasure, Have difficulty expressing emotions and reacting appropriately to situations, May seem humorless, indifferent or emotionally cold to others, May appear to lack motivation and goals, Don't react to praise or critical remarks from others.
Schizoid personality disorder usually begins by early adulthood, though some features may be noticeable during childhood. These features may cause you to have trouble functioning well in school, a job, socially or in other areas of life. However, you may do reasonably well in your job if you mostly work alone.
Although a different disorder, schizoid personality disorder can have some similar symptoms to schizotypal personality disorder and schizophrenia, such as a severely limited ability to make social connections and a lack of emotional expression. People with these disorders may be viewed as odd or eccentric.
Even though the names may sound similar, unlike schizotypal personality disorder and schizophrenia, people with schizoid personality disorder: Are in touch with reality, so they're unlikely to experience paranoia or hallucinations, Make sense when they speak (although the tone may not be lively), so they don't have conversational patterns that are strange and hard to follow.
People with schizoid personality disorder usually only seek treatment for a related problem, such as depression.
If someone close to you has urged you to seek help for symptoms common to schizoid personality disorder, make an appointment with a health care or mental health professional.
If you suspect a loved one may have schizoid personality disorder, gently suggest that the person seek medical attention. It might help to offer to go along to the first appointment.
Personality is the combination of thoughts, emotions and behaviors that makes you unique. It's the way you view, understand and relate to the outside world, as well as how you see yourself. Personality forms during childhood, shaped through an interaction of inherited tendencies and environmental factors.
In normal development, children learn over time to accurately interpret social cues and respond appropriately. What causes the development of schizoid personality disorder is unknown, although a combination of genetic and environmental factors, particularly in early childhood, may play a role in developing the disorder.
Factors that increase your risk of developing schizoid personality disorder include: Having a parent or other relative who has schizoid personality disorder, schizotypal personality disorder or schizophrenia, Having a parent who was cold, neglectful or unresponsive to emotional needs.
People with schizoid personality disorder are at an increased risk of: Developing schizotypal personality disorder, schizophrenia or another delusional disorder, Other personality disorders, Major depression, Anxiety disorders.
Schizophrenia involves a range of problems with thinking (cognition), behavior and emotions. Signs and symptoms may vary, but usually involve delusions, hallucinations or disorganized speech, and reflect an impaired ability to function. Symptoms may include:
Delusions. These are false beliefs that are not based in reality. For example, you think that you're being harmed or harassed; certain gestures or comments are directed at you; you have exceptional ability or fame; another person is in love with you; or a major catastrophe is about to occur. Delusions occur in most people with schizophrenia.
Hallucinations. These usually involve seeing or hearing things that don't exist. Yet for the person with schizophrenia, they have the full force and impact of a normal experience. Hallucinations can be in any of the senses, but hearing voices is the most common hallucination.
Disorganized thinking (speech). Disorganized thinking is inferred from disorganized speech. Effective communication can be impaired, and answers to questions may be partially or completely unrelated. Rarely, speech may include putting together meaningless words that can't be understood, sometimes known as word salad.
Extremely disorganized or abnormal motor behavior. This may show in a number of ways, from childlike silliness to unpredictable agitation. Behavior isn't focused on a goal, so it's hard to do tasks. Behavior can include resistance to instructions, inappropriate or bizarre posture, a complete lack of response, or useless and excessive movement.
Negative symptoms. This refers to reduced or lack of ability to function normally. For example, the person may neglect personal hygiene or appear to lack emotion (doesn't make eye contact, doesn't change facial expressions or speaks in a monotone). Also, the person may lose interest in everyday activities, socially withdraw or lack the ability to experience pleasure.
Symptoms can vary in type and severity over time, with periods of worsening and remission of symptoms. Some symptoms may always be present.
In men, schizophrenia symptoms typically start in the early to mid-20s. In women, symptoms typically begin in the late 20s. It's uncommon for children to be diagnosed with schizophrenia and rare for those older than age 45.
Schizophrenia symptoms in teenagers are similar to those in adults, but the condition may be more difficult to recognize. This may be in part because some of the early symptoms of schizophrenia in teenagers are common for typical development during teen years, such as: Withdrawal from friends and family, A drop in performance at school, Trouble sleeping, Irritability or depressed mood, Lack of motivation.
Also, recreational substance use, such as marijuana, methamphetamines or LSD, can sometimes cause similar signs and symptoms.
Compared with schizophrenia symptoms in adults, teens may be: Less likely to have delusions, More likely to have visual hallucinations.
People with schizophrenia often lack awareness that their difficulties stem from a mental disorder that requires medical attention. So it often falls to family or friends to get them help.
If you think someone you know may have symptoms of schizophrenia, talk to him or her about your concerns. Although you can't force someone to seek professional help, you can offer encouragement and support and help your loved one find a qualified doctor or mental health professional.
If your loved one poses a danger to self or others or can't provide his or her own food, clothing, or shelter, you may need to call 911 or other emergency responders for help so that your loved one can be evaluated by a mental health professional.
In some cases, emergency hospitalization may be needed. Laws on involuntary commitment for mental health treatment vary by state. You can contact community mental health agencies or police departments in your area for details.
Suicidal thoughts and behavior are common among people with schizophrenia. If you have a loved one who is in danger of attempting suicide or has made a suicide attempt, make sure someone stays with that person. Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately. Or, if you think you can do so safely, take the person to the nearest hospital emergency room.
It's not known what causes schizophrenia, but researchers believe that a combination of genetics, brain chemistry and environment contributes to development of the disorder.
Problems with certain naturally occurring brain chemicals, including neurotransmitters called dopamine and glutamate, may contribute to schizophrenia. Neuroimaging studies show differences in the brain structure and central nervous system of people with schizophrenia. While researchers aren't certain about the significance of these changes, they indicate that schizophrenia is a brain disease.
Although the precise cause of schizophrenia isn't known, certain factors seem to increase the risk of developing or triggering schizophrenia, including: Having a family history of schizophrenia, Some pregnancy and birth complications, such as malnutrition or exposure to toxins or viruses that may impact brain development, Taking mind-altering (psychoactive or psychotropic) drugs during teen years and young adulthood.
Left untreated, schizophrenia can result in severe problems that affect every area of life. Complications that schizophrenia may cause or be associated with include: Suicide, suicide attempts and thoughts of suicide, Anxiety disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), Depression, Abuse of alcohol or other drugs, including nicotine, Inability to work or attend school, Financial problems and homelessness, Social isolation, Health and medical problems, Being victimized, Aggressive behavior, although it's uncommon.
Schizotypal personality disorder typically includes five or more of these signs and symptoms: Being a loner and lacking close friends outside of the immediate family, Flat emotions or limited or inappropriate emotional responses, Persistent and excessive social anxiety, Incorrect interpretation of events, such as a feeling that something that is actually harmless or inoffensive has a direct personal meaning, Peculiar, eccentric or unusual thinking, beliefs or mannerisms, Suspicious or paranoid thoughts and constant doubts about the loyalty of others, Belief in special powers, such as mental telepathy or superstitions, Unusual perceptions, such as sensing an absent person's presence or having illusions, Dressing in peculiar ways, such as appearing unkempt or wearing oddly matched clothes, Peculiar style of speech, such as vague or unusual patterns of speaking, or rambling oddly during conversations.
Signs and symptoms of schizotypal personality disorder, such as increased interest in solitary activities or a high level of social anxiety, may be seen in the teen years. The child may be an underperformer in school or appear socially out of step with peers, which may result in teasing or bullying.
Schizotypal personality disorder can easily be confused with schizophrenia, a severe mental illness in which people lose contact with reality (psychosis). While people with schizotypal personality disorder may experience brief psychotic episodes with delusions or hallucinations, the episodes are not as frequent, prolonged or intense as in schizophrenia.
Another key distinction is that people with schizotypal personality disorder usually can be made aware of the difference between their distorted ideas and reality. Those with schizophrenia generally can't be swayed away from their delusions.
Despite the differences, people with schizotypal personality disorder can benefit from treatments similar to those used for schizophrenia. Schizotypal personality disorder is sometimes considered to be on a spectrum with schizophrenia, with schizotypal personality disorder viewed as less severe.
People with schizotypal personality disorder are likely to seek help only at the urging of friends or family members. Or people with schizotypal personality disorder may seek help for another problem such as depression. If you suspect that a friend or family member may have the disorder, you might gently suggest that the person seek medical attention, starting with a primary care doctor or mental health professional.
If you're concerned that you might harm yourself or someone else, go to an emergency room or call 911 or your local emergency number immediately. Or call a suicide hotline number. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) or use its webchat at suicidepreventionlifeline.org/chat.
Personality is the combination of thoughts, emotions and behaviors that makes you unique. It's the way you view, understand and relate to the outside world, as well as how you see yourself. Personality forms during childhood, shaped through an interaction of inherited tendencies and environmental factors.
In normal development, children learn over time to appropriately interact with others, to interpret social cues, and to respond to social situations appropriately and with flexibility. What exactly goes wrong for a person with schizotypal personality disorder isn't known for certain, but it's likely that changes in the way the brain functions, genetics, environmental influences and learned behaviors may play a role.
Your risk of schizotypal personality disorder may be greater if you have a relative who has schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder.
People with schizotypal personality disorder are at an increased risk of: Depression, Anxiety, Other personality disorders, Schizophrenia, Temporary psychotic episodes, usually in response to stress, Problems with alcohol or drugs, Suicide attempts, Work, school, relationship and social problems.
Pain that radiates from your lower (lumbar) spine to your buttock and down the back of your leg is the hallmark of sciatica. You might feel the discomfort almost anywhere along the nerve pathway, but it's especially likely to follow a path from your low back to your buttock and the back of your thigh and calf.
The pain can vary widely, from a mild ache to a sharp, burning sensation or excruciating pain. Sometimes it can feel like a jolt or electric shock. It can be worse when you cough or sneeze, and prolonged sitting can aggravate symptoms. Usually only one side of your body is affected.
Some people also have numbness, tingling or muscle weakness in the affected leg or foot. You might have pain in one part of your leg and numbness in another part.
Mild sciatica usually goes away over time. Call your doctor if self-care measures fail to ease your symptoms or if your pain lasts longer than a week, is severe or becomes progressively worse. Get immediate medical care if: You have sudden, severe pain in your low back or leg and numbness or muscle weakness in your leg, The pain follows a violent injury, such as a traffic accident, You have trouble controlling your bowels or bladder.
Sciatica occurs when the sciatic nerve becomes pinched, usually by a herniated disk in your spine or by an overgrowth of bone (bone spur) on your vertebrae. More rarely, the nerve can be compressed by a tumor or damaged by a disease such as diabetes.
Risk factors for sciatica include:
Age. Age-related changes in the spine, such as herniated disks and bone spurs, are the most common causes of sciatica.
Obesity. By increasing the stress on your spine, excess body weight can contribute to the spinal changes that trigger sciatica.
Occupation. A job that requires you to twist your back, carry heavy loads or drive a motor vehicle for long periods might play a role in sciatica, but there's no conclusive evidence of this link.
Prolonged sitting. People who sit for prolonged periods or have a sedentary lifestyle are more likely to develop sciatica than active people are.
Diabetes. This condition, which affects the way your body uses blood sugar, increases your risk of nerve damage.
Although most people recover fully from sciatica, often without treatment, sciatica can potentially cause permanent nerve damage. Seek immediate medical attention if you have: Loss of feeling in the affected leg, Weakness in the affected leg, Loss of bowel or bladder function.
Scleroderma's signs and symptoms vary, depending on which parts of your body are affected:
Skin. Nearly everyone who has scleroderma experiences a hardening and tightening of patches of skin. These patches may be shaped like ovals or straight lines, or cover wide areas of the trunk and limbs. The number, location and size of the patches vary by type of scleroderma. Skin can appear shiny because it's so tight, and movement of the affected area may be restricted.
Fingers or toes. One of the earliest signs of systemic scleroderma is Raynaud's disease, which causes the small blood vessels in your fingers and toes to contract in response to cold temperatures or emotional distress. When this happens, your fingers or toes may turn blue or feel painful or numb. Raynaud's disease also occurs in people who don't have scleroderma.
Digestive system. Scleroderma can cause a variety of digestive symptoms, depending on which part of the digestive tract is affected. If the esophagus is affected, you might have heartburn or difficulty swallowing. If the intestines are affected, you might have cramps, bloating, diarrhea or constipation. Some people who have scleroderma may also have problems absorbing nutrients if their intestinal muscles aren't properly moving food through the intestines.
Heart, lungs or kidneys. Scleroderma can affect the function of the heart, lungs or kidneys to varying degrees. These problems, if left untreated, can become life-threatening.
Scleroderma results from an overproduction and accumulation of collagen in body tissues. Collagen is a fibrous type of protein that makes up your body's connective tissues, including your skin.
Doctors don't know exactly what causes the abnormal collagen production to begin, but the body's immune system appears to play a role. Most likely, scleroderma is caused by a combination of factors, including immune system problems, genetics and environmental triggers.
Anyone can get scleroderma, but it does occur much more often in women than in men. Several combined factors appear to influence the risk of developing scleroderma:
Genetics. People who have certain gene variations appear to be more likely to develop scleroderma. This may explain why a small number of scleroderma cases appear to run in families and why certain types of scleroderma are more common for certain ethnic groups. For example, Choctaw Native Americans are more likely to develop the type of scleroderma that affects internal organs.
Environmental triggers. Research suggests that, in some people, scleroderma symptoms may be triggered by exposure to certain viruses, medications or drugs. Repeated exposure — such as at work — to certain harmful substances or chemicals also may increase the risk of scleroderma.
Immune system problems. Scleroderma is believed to be an autoimmune disease. This means that it occurs in part because the body's immune system begins to attack the connective tissues. In 15 to 20 percent of cases, a person who has scleroderma also has symptoms of another autoimmune disease, such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus or Sjogren's syndrome.
Scleroderma complications range from mild to severe and can affect your:
Fingertips. The variety of Raynaud's disease that occurs with systemic scleroderma can be so severe that the restricted blood flow permanently damages the tissue at the fingertips, causing pits or skin sores. In some cases, the tissue on the fingertips may die and require amputation.
Lungs. Scarring of lung tissue can result in reduced lung function, which can impact your ability to breathe and tolerance for exercise. You may also develop high blood pressure in the arteries to your lungs.
Kidneys. When scleroderma affects your kidneys, you can develop elevated blood pressure and an increased level of protein in your urine. More-serious effects of kidney complications may include renal crisis, which involves a sudden increase in blood pressure and rapid kidney failure.
Heart. Scarring of heart tissue increases your risk of abnormal heartbeats and congestive heart failure, and can cause inflammation of the membranous sac surrounding your heart. Scleroderma can also raise the pressure on the right side of your heart and cause it to wear out.
Teeth. Severe tightening of facial skin can cause your mouth to become smaller and narrower, which may make it hard to brush your teeth or to even have them professionally cleaned. People who have scleroderma often don't produce normal amounts of saliva, so the risk of dental decay increases even more.
Digestive system. Digestive problems associated with scleroderma can lead to heartburn and difficulty swallowing. It can also cause bouts of cramps, bloating, constipation or diarrhea.
Sexual function. Men who have scleroderma may experience erectile dysfunction. Scleroderma may also affect the sexual function of women by decreasing sexual lubrication and constricting the vaginal opening.
Symptoms of sclerosing mesenteritis include pain in your belly, vomiting, bloating, diarrhea and fever. Sometimes people don't have any symptoms.
The cause of sclerosing mesenteritis is not known.
Signs and symptoms of scoliosis may include: Uneven shoulders, One shoulder blade that appears more prominent than the other, Uneven waist, One hip higher than the other.
If a scoliosis curve gets worse, the spine will also rotate or twist, in addition to curving side to side. This causes the ribs on one side of the body to stick out farther than on the other side.
Go to your doctor if you notice signs or symptoms of scoliosis in your child. Mild curves, however, can develop without the parent or child knowing it because they appear gradually and usually don't cause pain. Occasionally, teachers, friends and sports teammates are the first to notice a child's scoliosis.
Doctors don't know what causes the most common type of scoliosis — although it appears to involve hereditary factors, because the disorder tends to run in families. Less common types of scoliosis may be caused by: Neuromuscular conditions, such as cerebral palsy or muscular dystrophy, Birth defects affecting the development of the bones of the spine, Injuries to or infections of the spine.
Risk factors for developing the most common type of scoliosis include:
Age. Signs and symptoms typically begin during the growth spurt that occurs just prior to puberty.
Sex. Although both boys and girls develop mild scoliosis at about the same rate, girls have a much higher risk of the curve worsening and requiring treatment.
Family history. Scoliosis can run in families, but most children with scoliosis don't have a family history of the disease.
While most people with scoliosis have a mild form of the disorder, scoliosis may sometimes cause complications, including:
Lung and heart damage. In severe scoliosis, the rib cage may press against the lungs and heart, making it more difficult to breathe and harder for the heart to pump.
Back problems. Adults who had scoliosis as children are more likely to have chronic back pain than are people in the general population.
Appearance. As scoliosis worsens, it can cause more noticeable changes — including uneven hips and shoulders, prominent ribs, and a shift of the waist and trunk to the side. Individuals with scoliosis often become self-conscious about their appearance.
Signs and symptoms at the site of a scorpion sting may include: Pain, which can be intense, Numbness and tingling, Slight swelling, Warmth.
Signs and symptoms related to widespread (systemic) venom effects usually occur in children who are stung and may include: Difficulty breathing, Muscle twitching or thrashing, Unusual head, neck and eye movements, Drooling, Sweating, Nausea and vomiting, High blood pressure (hypertension), Accelerated heart rate (tachycardia), Restlessness or excitability, or inconsolable crying in children.
As with other stinging insects, such as bees and wasps, it is possible for people who have previously been stung by scorpions to have allergic reactions with subsequent stings. Reactions to these subsequent stings are sometimes severe enough to cause a life-threatening condition called anaphylaxis. Signs and symptoms in these cases are similar to those of anaphylaxis caused by bee stings and can include hives, trouble breathing, and nausea and vomiting.
Get immediate medical care for a child stung by a scorpion.
Call your local poison control center for advice if you're concerned about a scorpion sting. To reach a poison control center in the United States, call Poison Help at 800-222-1222.
Seek prompt medical care if you've been stung by a scorpion and begin to experience severe symptoms.
A scorpion sting is caused by the stinger in a scorpion's tail. When a scorpion stings, its stinger can release venom. The venom contains a complex mix of toxins that affect the nervous system (neurotoxins).
Scorpions are arthropods — a relative of insects, spiders and crustaceans. Bark scorpions are about 2 inches (5 centimeters) long. Scorpions have eight legs and a pair of lobster-like pinchers and a tail that curves up. Scorpions are nocturnal creatures that resist stinging unless provoked or attacked.
Certain activities can increase your risk of a scorpion sting:
Living where scorpions are. In the United States, scorpions mainly live in the desert Southwest, primarily Arizona, New Mexico and parts of California. Worldwide, they're found most often in Mexico, North Africa, South America, the Middle East and India.
Working, hiking or camping where scorpions are. Bark scorpions live under rocks, logs and tree bark — hence, the name. You're especially likely to encounter one when you're working outside, hiking or camping.
Traveling where scorpions are. You're more likely to encounter more-dangerous scorpions while traveling in specific parts of the world. And you might bring them home with you, as scorpions can hide in clothing, luggage and shipping containers.
The very old and the very young are most likely to die of untreated venomous scorpion stings. The cause is usually heart or respiratory failure occurring some hours after the sting. Very few deaths from scorpion stings have been reported in the United States.
Another possible complication of scorpion stings, though rare, is a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis).
Signs and symptoms of scrotal masses vary depending on the abnormality. Signs and symptoms might include: An unusual lump, Sudden pain, A dull aching pain or feeling of heaviness in the scrotum, Pain that radiates throughout the groin, abdomen or lower back, Tender, swollen or hardened testicle, Tender, swollen or hardened epididymis (ep-ih-DID-uh-miss), the soft, comma-shaped tube above and behind the testicle that stores and transports sperm, Swelling in the scrotum, Redness of the skin of the scrotum, Nausea or vomiting.
If the cause of a scrotal mass is an infection, signs and symptoms also might include: Fever, Urinary frequency, Pus or blood in the urine.
Seek emergency medical care if you develop sudden pain in your scrotum. Some conditions require prompt treatment to avoid permanent damage to a testicle.
See your doctor if you detect a lump in your scrotum, even if it's not painful or tender, or if you experience other symptoms of a scrotal mass.
Some scrotal masses are more common in children. See your doctor if your child experiences symptoms of a scrotal mass, if you have any concerns about the development of the genitals or if a testicle is “missing” — an undescended or retractile testicle, which might increase the risk of some scrotal masses later in life.
A number of disorders can result in a scrotal mass or an abnormality in the scrotum, including:
Testicular cancer. Testicular cancer is a tumor containing abnormal testicular tissue, which can usually be felt as a nontender lump in the scrotum.
Some men experience pain and swelling, but most tumors don't cause symptoms. See your doctor if you notice any new lump in your scrotum.
Spermatocele. Also known as a spermatic cyst or epididymal cyst, spermatocele is a typically painless, noncancerous (benign), fluid-filled sac in the scrotum, usually above the testicle.
Epididymitis. This is inflammation of the epididymis, the comma-shaped structure above and behind the testicle that stores and transports sperm.
Epididymitis is often caused by a bacterial infection, including sexually transmitted bacterial infections, such as chlamydia. Less commonly, epididymitis is caused by a viral infection or an abnormal flow of urine into the epididymis.
Orchitis. This is inflammation of the testicle usually due to a viral infection — most commonly mumps. When orchitis is caused by a bacterial infection, the epididymis also might be infected.
Hydrocele. Hydrocele occurs when there is excess fluid between the layers of a sac that surrounds each testicle. A small amount of fluid in this space is normal, but the excess fluid of a hydrocele usually results in a painless swelling of the scrotum.
In infants, a hydrocele occurs usually because an opening between the abdomen and the scrotum hasn't properly sealed during development.
In adults, a hydrocele occurs usually because of an imbalance in the production or absorption of fluid, often as a result of injury or infection in the scrotum.
Hematocele. Hematocele occurs where there is blood between the layers of a sac that surrounds each testicle. Traumatic injury, such as a direct blow to the testicles, is the most likely cause.
Varicocele. This is the enlargement of the veins within the scrotum that carry oxygen-depleted blood from each testicle and the epididymis. Varicocele is more common on the left side of the scrotum because of differences in how blood circulates from each side.
A varicocele might cause infertility.
Inguinal hernia. This is a condition in which a portion of the small intestine pushes through an opening or weak spot in the tissue separating the abdomen and groin.
In infants, an inguinal hernia usually occurs because the passageway from the abdomen to the scrotum has failed to close during development.
An inguinal hernia might appear as a mass in the scrotum or higher in the groin.
Testicular torsion. This is a twisting of the spermatic cord, the bundle of blood vessels, nerves and the tube that carries semen from the testicle to the penis.
This painful condition cuts off blood to the testicle and can result in the loss of the testicle if not promptly treated. The affected testicle might be sideways, enlarged and higher than normal.
Factors that increase the risk of a scrotal mass vary because of the various causes of scrotal abnormalities. Significant risk factors include:
An undescended testicle doesn't leave the abdomen and enter the scrotum during fetal development or early infancy. A retractile testicle descends into the scrotum, but retreats to the abdomen. Either might increase the risk of: Inguinal hernia, Testicular torsion, Testicular cancer.
Abnormalities of the testicles, penis or kidneys present at birth (congenital) might increase the risk of a scrotal mass and testicular cancer later in life.
If you have had cancer in one testicle, you're at increased risk of cancer affecting the other testicle. Having a father or brother who has had testicular cancer also increases your risk.
Not all scrotal masses result in long-term complications. However, any mass that affects the health or function of the testicle can lead to: Delayed or poor development during puberty, Infertility.
In most cases, seasonal affective disorder symptoms appear during late fall or early winter and go away during the sunnier days of spring and summer. Less commonly, people with the opposite pattern have symptoms that begin in spring or summer. In either case, symptoms may start out mild and become more severe as the season progresses.
Signs and symptoms of SAD may include: Feeling depressed most of the day, nearly every day, Losing interest in activities you once enjoyed, Having low energy, Having problems with sleeping, Experiencing changes in your appetite or weight, Feeling sluggish or agitated, Having difficulty concentrating, Feeling hopeless, worthless or guilty, Having frequent thoughts of death or suicide.
Symptoms specific to winter-onset SAD, sometimes called winter depression, may include: Oversleeping, Appetite changes, especially a craving for foods high in carbohydrates, Weight gain, Tiredness or low energy.
Symptoms specific to summer-onset seasonal affective disorder, sometimes called summer depression, may include: Trouble sleeping (insomnia), Poor appetite, Weight loss, Agitation or anxiety.
In some people with bipolar disorder, spring and summer can bring on symptoms of mania or a less intense form of mania (hypomania), and fall and winter can be a time of depression.
It's normal to have some days when you feel down. But if you feel down for days at a time and you can't get motivated to do activities you normally enjoy, see your doctor. This is especially important if your sleep patterns and appetite have changed, you turn to alcohol for comfort or relaxation, or you feel hopeless or think about suicide.
The specific cause of seasonal affective disorder remains unknown. Some factors that may come into play include:
Your biological clock (circadian rhythm). The reduced level of sunlight in fall and winter may cause winter-onset SAD. This decrease in sunlight may disrupt your body's internal clock and lead to feelings of depression.
Serotonin levels. A drop in serotonin, a brain chemical (neurotransmitter) that affects mood, might play a role in SAD. Reduced sunlight can cause a drop in serotonin that may trigger depression.
Melatonin levels. The change in season can disrupt the balance of the body's level of melatonin, which plays a role in sleep patterns and mood.
Seasonal affective disorder is diagnosed more often in women than in men. And SAD occurs more frequently in younger adults than in older adults.
Factors that may increase your risk of seasonal affective disorder include:
Family history. People with SAD may be more likely to have blood relatives with SAD or another form of depression.
Having major depression or bipolar disorder. Symptoms of depression may worsen seasonally if you have one of these conditions.
Living far from the equator. SAD appears to be more common among people who live far north or south of the equator. This may be due to decreased sunlight during the winter and longer days during the summer months.
Take signs and symptoms of seasonal affective disorder seriously. As with other types of depression, SAD can get worse and lead to problems if it's not treated. These can include: Social withdrawal, School or work problems, Substance abuse, Other mental health disorders such as anxiety or eating disorders, Suicidal thoughts or behavior.
Treatment can help prevent complications, especially if SAD is diagnosed and treated before symptoms get bad.
Seborrheic dermatitis signs and symptoms may include: Skin flakes (dandruff) on your scalp, hair, eyebrows, beard or mustache, Patches of greasy skin covered with flaky white or yellow scales or crust on the scalp, face, sides of the nose, eyebrows, ears, eyelids, chest, armpits, groin area or under the breasts, Red skin, Itching.
The signs and symptoms may be more severe if you're stressed, and they tend to flare in cold, dry seasons.
See your doctor if: You're so uncomfortable that you're losing sleep or being distracted from your daily routines, Your condition is causing embarrassment and anxiety, You suspect your skin is infected, You've tried self-care steps without success.
Doctors don't yet know the exact cause of seborrheic dermatitis. It may be related to: A yeast (fungus) called malassezia that is in the oil secretion on the skin, An irregular response of the immune system.
A seborrheic keratosis usually looks like a waxy or wartlike growth. It typically appears on the face, chest, shoulders or back. You may develop a single growth, though multiple growths are more common.
A seborrheic keratosis: Ranges in color from light tan to brown or black, Is round or oval shaped, Has a characteristic "pasted on" look, Is flat or slightly raised with a scaly surface, Ranges in size from very small to more than 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) across, May itch.
See your doctor if:
Many growths develop over a short time.
The growths get irritated or bleed when your clothing rubs against them. You may want the growths removed.
You notice suspicious changes in your skin, such as sores or growths that grow rapidly, bleed and don't heal. These could be signs of skin cancer.
Doctors don't know exactly what causes seborrheic keratoses. The growths tend to run in some families, so genes may play a role.
You're generally more likely to develop seborrheic keratoses if you're over age 50. You're also more likely to have them if you have a family history of the condition.
Like primary hypertension, secondary hypertension usually has no specific signs or symptoms, even if your blood pressure has reached dangerously high levels.
If you've been diagnosed with high blood pressure, having any of these signs may mean your condition is secondary hypertension: High blood pressure that doesn't respond to blood pressure medications (resistant hypertension), Very high blood pressure — systolic blood pressure over 180 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) or diastolic blood pressure over 120 mm Hg, High blood pressure that no longer responds to medication that previously controlled your blood pressure, Sudden-onset high blood pressure before age 30 or after age 55, No family history of high blood pressure, No obesity.
If you have a condition that can cause secondary hypertension, you may need your blood pressure checked more frequently. Ask your doctor how often to have your blood pressure checked.
A number of conditions can cause secondary hypertension. Several kidney diseases may cause secondary hypertension, including:
Diabetes complications (diabetic nephropathy). Diabetes can damage your kidneys' filtering system, which can lead to high blood pressure.
Polycystic kidney disease. In this inherited condition, cysts in your kidneys prevent the kidneys from working normally and can raise blood pressure.
Glomerular disease. Your kidneys filter waste and sodium using microscopic-sized filters called glomeruli that can sometimes become swollen. If the swollen glomeruli can't work normally, you may develop high blood pressure.
Renovascular hypertension. This type of hypertension is caused by narrowing (stenosis) of one or both arteries leading to your kidneys.
Renovascular hypertension is often caused by the same type of fatty plaques that can damage your coronary arteries (atherosclerosis) or a separate condition in which the muscle and fibrous tissues of the renal artery wall thicken and harden into rings (fibromuscular dysplasia). This condition can cause irreversible kidney damage.
Medical conditions affecting hormone levels may also cause secondary hypertension. These conditions may include:
Cushing syndrome. In this condition, corticosteroid medications may cause secondary hypertension, or hypertension may be caused by a pituitary tumor or other factors that cause the adrenal glands to produce too much of the hormone cortisol.
Aldosteronism. In this condition, a tumor in one or both of the adrenal glands, increased growth of normal cells in one or both of the adrenal glands or other factors cause the adrenal glands to release an excessive amount of the hormone aldosterone. This makes your kidneys retain salt and water and lose too much potassium, which raises blood pressure.
Pheochromocytoma. This rare tumor, usually found in an adrenal gland, increases production of the hormones adrenaline and noradrenaline, which can lead to long-term high blood pressure or short-term spikes in blood pressure.
Thyroid problems. When the thyroid gland doesn't produce enough thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism) or produces too much thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism), high blood pressure can result.
Hyperparathyroidism. The parathyroid glands regulate levels of calcium and phosphorus in your body. If the glands secrete too much parathyroid hormone, the amount of calcium in your blood rises — which triggers a rise in blood pressure.
Other possible causes of secondary hypertension include:
Coarctation of the aorta. With this defect that's generally present at birth, the body's main artery (aorta) is narrowed (coarctation). This forces the heart to pump harder to get blood through the aorta and to the rest of your body. This, in turn, raises blood pressure — particularly in your arms.
Sleep apnea. In this condition, often marked by severe snoring, breathing repeatedly stops and starts during sleep, causing you to not get enough oxygen.
Not getting enough oxygen may damage the lining of the blood vessel walls, which may make your blood vessels less effective in regulating your blood pressure. In addition, sleep apnea causes part of the nervous system to be overactive and release certain chemicals that increase blood pressure.
Obesity. As you gain weight, the amount of blood circulating through your body increases. This puts added pressure on your artery walls, increasing your blood pressure.
Excess weight often is associated with an increase in heart rate and a reduction in the capacity of your blood vessels to transport blood. In addition, fat deposits can release chemicals that raise blood pressure. All of these factors can cause hypertension.
Pregnancy. Pregnancy can make existing high blood pressure worse, or may cause high blood pressure to develop (pregnancy-induced hypertension or preeclampsia).
Medications and supplements. Various prescription medications — such as pain relievers, birth control pills, antidepressants and drugs used after organ transplants — can cause or aggravate high blood pressure in some people.
Over-the-counter decongestants and certain herbal supplements, including ginseng, licorice and ephedra (ma-huang), may have the same effect. Many illegal drugs, such as cocaine and methamphetamine, also increase blood pressure.
The greatest risk factor for having secondary hypertension is having a medical condition that can cause high blood pressure, such as kidney, artery, heart or endocrine system problems.
Secondary hypertension can worsen the underlying medical condition you have that's causing your high blood pressure. If you don't receive treatment, secondary hypertension can also be associated with other medical conditions, such as:
Damage to your arteries. This can result in hardening and thickening of the arteries (atherosclerosis), which can lead to a heart attack, stroke or other complications.
Aneurysm. Increased blood pressure can cause your blood vessels to weaken and bulge, forming an aneurysm. If an aneurysm ruptures, it can be life-threatening.
Heart failure. To pump blood against the higher pressure in your vessels, your heart muscle thickens. Eventually, the thickened muscle may have a hard time pumping enough blood to meet your body's needs, which can lead to heart failure.
Weakened and narrowed blood vessels in your kidneys. This can prevent these organs from functioning normally.
Thickened, narrowed or torn blood vessels in the eyes. This can result in vision loss.
Metabolic syndrome. This syndrome is a cluster of disorders of your body's metabolism — including increased waist circumference, high triglycerides, low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (the "good" cholesterol), high blood pressure and high insulin levels.
If you have high blood pressure, you're more likely to have other components of metabolic syndrome. The more components you have, the greater your risk of developing diabetes, heart disease or stroke.
Trouble with memory or understanding. Uncontrolled high blood pressure also may affect your ability to think, remember and learn. Trouble with memory or understanding concepts is more common in people who have high blood pressure.
With a seizure, signs and symptoms can range from mild to severe and vary depending on the type of seizure. Seizure signs and symptoms may include: Temporary confusion, A staring spell, Uncontrollable jerking movements of the arms and legs, Loss of consciousness or awareness, Cognitive or emotional symptoms, such as fear, anxiety or deja vu.
Doctors generally classify seizures as either focal or generalized, based on how and where abnormal brain activity begins. Seizures may also be classified as unknown onset, if how the seizure began isn't known.
Focal seizures result from abnormal electrical activity in one area of your brain. Focal seizures can occur with or without loss of consciousness:
Focal seizures with impaired awareness. These seizures involve a change or loss of consciousness or awareness. You may stare into space and not respond normally to your environment or perform repetitive movements, such as hand rubbing, chewing, swallowing or walking in circles.
Focal seizures without loss of consciousness. These seizures may alter emotions or change the way things look, smell, feel, taste or sound, but you don't lose consciousness. These seizures may also result in the involuntary jerking of a body part, such as an arm or leg, and spontaneous sensory symptoms such as tingling, dizziness and flashing lights.
Symptoms of focal seizures may be confused with other neurological disorders, such as migraine, narcolepsy or mental illness.
Seizures that appear to involve all areas of the brain are called generalized seizures. Different types of generalized seizures include:
Absence seizures. Absence seizures, previously known as petit mal seizures, often occur in children and are characterized by staring into space or by subtle body movements, such as eye blinking or lip smacking. These seizures may occur in clusters and cause a brief loss of awareness.
Tonic seizures. Tonic seizures cause stiffening of your muscles. These seizures usually affect muscles in your back, arms and legs and may cause you to fall to the ground.
Atonic seizures. Atonic seizures, also known as drop seizures, cause a loss of muscle control, which may cause you to suddenly collapse or fall down.
Clonic seizures. Clonic seizures are associated with repeated or rhythmic, jerking muscle movements. These seizures usually affect the neck, face and arms.
Myoclonic seizures. Myoclonic seizures usually appear as sudden brief jerks or twitches of your arms and legs.
Tonic-clonic seizures. Tonic-clonic seizures, previously known as grand mal seizures, are the most dramatic type of epileptic seizure and can cause an abrupt loss of consciousness, body stiffening and shaking, and sometimes loss of bladder control or biting your tongue.
Seek immediate medical help if any of the following occurs:
The seizure lasts more than five minutes.
Breathing or consciousness doesn't return after the seizure stops.
A second seizure follows immediately.
You have a high fever.
You're experiencing heat exhaustion.
You're pregnant.
You have diabetes.
You've injured yourself during the seizure.
If you experience a seizure for the first time, seek medical advice.
Nerve cells (neurons) in the brain create, send and receive electrical impulses, which allow the brain's nerve cells to communicate. Anything that disrupts these communication pathways can lead to a seizure.
The most common cause of seizures is epilepsy. But not every person who has a seizure has epilepsy. Sometimes seizures happen because of: High fever, which can be associated with an infection such as meningitis, Lack of sleep, Low blood sodium (hyponatremia), which can happen with diuretic therapy, Medications, such as certain pain relievers, antidepressants or smoking cessation therapies, that lower the seizure threshold, Head trauma that causes an area of bleeding in the brain, Stroke, Brain tumor, Illegal or recreational drugs, such as amphetamines or cocaine, Alcohol abuse, during times of withdrawal or extreme intoxication, COVID-19 infection.
Having a seizure at certain times can lead to circumstances that are dangerous for you or others. You might be at risk of:
Falling. If you fall during a seizure, you can injure your head or break a bone.
Drowning. If you have a seizure while swimming or bathing, you're at risk of accidental drowning.
Car accidents. A seizure that causes either loss of awareness or control can be dangerous if you're driving a car or operating other equipment.
Pregnancy complications. Seizures during pregnancy pose dangers to both mother and baby, and certain anti-epileptic medications increase the risk of birth defects. If you have epilepsy and plan to become pregnant, work with your doctor so that he or she can adjust your medications and monitor your pregnancy, as needed.
Emotional health issues. People with seizures are more likely to have psychological problems, such as depression and anxiety. Problems may be a result of difficulties dealing with the condition itself as well as medication side effects.
Signs and symptoms of self-injury may include: Scars, often in patterns, Fresh cuts, scratches, bruises, bite marks or other wounds, Excessive rubbing of an area to create a burn, Keeping sharp objects on hand, Wearing long sleeves or long pants, even in hot weather, Frequent reports of accidental injury, Difficulties in interpersonal relationships, Behavioral and emotional instability, impulsivity and unpredictability, Statements of helplessness, hopelessness or worthlessness.
Self-injury usually occurs in private and is done in a controlled or ritualistic manner that often leaves a pattern on the skin. Examples of self-harm include: Cutting (cuts or severe scratches with a sharp object), Scratching, Burning (with lit matches, cigarettes or heated, sharp objects such as knives), Carving words or symbols on the skin, Self-hitting, punching or head banging, Piercing the skin with sharp objects, Inserting objects under the skin.
Most frequently, the arms, legs and front of the torso are the targets of self-injury, but any area of the body may be used for self-injury. People who self-injure may use more than one method to harm themselves.
Becoming upset can trigger an urge to self-injure. Many people self-injure only a few times and then stop. But for others, self-injury can become a long-term, repetitive behavior.
If you're injuring yourself, even in a minor way, or if you have thoughts of harming yourself, reach out for help. Any form of self-injury is a sign of bigger issues that need to be addressed.
Talk to someone you trust — such as a friend, loved one, doctor, spiritual leader, or a school counselor, nurse or teacher — who can help you take the first steps to successful treatment. While you may feel ashamed and embarrassed about your behavior, you can find supportive, caring and nonjudgmental help.
If you have a friend or loved one who is self-injuring, you may be shocked and scared. Take all talk of self-injury seriously. Although you might feel that you'd be betraying a confidence, self-injury is too big a problem to ignore or to deal with alone. Here are some ways to help.
Your child. You can start by consulting your pediatrician or other health care provider who can provide an initial evaluation or a referral to a mental health professional. Express your concern, but don't yell at your child or make threats or accusations.
Preteen or teenage friend. Suggest that your friend talk to parents, a teacher, a school counselor or another trusted adult.
Adult. Gently express your concern and encourage the person to seek medical and mental health treatment.
If you've injured yourself severely or believe your injury may be life-threatening, or if you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
Also consider these options if you're having suicidal thoughts:
Call your mental health professional if you're seeing one.
Call a suicide hotline. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) or use their webchat on suicidepreventionlifeline.org/chat.
Seek help from your school nurse or counselor, teacher, doctor, or other health care provider.
Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
Contact a spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.
There's no one single or simple cause that leads someone to self-injure. In general, self-injury may result from:
Poor coping skills. Nonsuicidal self-injury is usually the result of an inability to cope in healthy ways with psychological pain.
Difficulty managing emotions. The person has a hard time regulating, expressing or understanding emotions. The mix of emotions that triggers self-injury is complex. For instance, there may be feelings of worthlessness, loneliness, panic, anger, guilt, rejection, self-hatred or confused sexuality
Through self-injury, the person may be trying to: Manage or reduce severe distress or anxiety and provide a sense of relief, Provide a distraction from painful emotions through physical pain, Feel a sense of control over his or her body, feelings, or life situations, Feel something — anything — even if it's physical pain, when feeling emotionally empty, Express internal feelings in an external way, Communicate depression or distressful feelings to the outside world, Be punished for perceived faults.
Most people who self-injure are teenagers and young adults, although those in other age groups also self-injure. Self-injury often starts in the preteen or early teen years, when emotions are more volatile and teens face increasing peer pressure, loneliness, and conflicts with parents or other authority figures.
Certain factors may increase the risk of self-injury, including:
Having friends who self-injure. People who have friends who intentionally harm themselves are more likely to begin self-injuring.
Life issues. Some people who injure themselves were neglected, were sexually, physically or emotionally abused, or experienced other traumatic events. They may have grown up and still remain in an unstable family environment, or they may be young people questioning their personal identity or sexuality. Some people who self-injure are socially isolated.
Mental health issues. People who self-injure are more likely to be highly self-critical and be poor problem-solvers. In addition, self-injury is commonly associated with certain mental disorders, such as borderline personality disorder, depression, anxiety disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder and eating disorders.
Alcohol or drug use. People who harm themselves often do so while under the influence of alcohol or recreational drugs.
Self-injury can cause a variety of complications, including: Worsening feelings of shame, guilt and low self-esteem, Infection, either from wounds or from sharing tools, Permanent scars or disfigurement, Severe, possibly fatal injury, Worsening of underlying issues and disorders, if not adequately treated.
Although self-injury is not usually a suicide attempt, it can increase the risk of suicide because of the emotional problems that trigger self-injury. And the pattern of damaging the body in times of distress can make suicide more likely.
Signs and symptoms of a separated shoulder might include: Shoulder pain, Shoulder or arm weakness, Shoulder bruising or swelling, Limited shoulder movement, A bump and swelling at the top of your shoulder.
Contact your doctor if you have persistent tenderness or pain near the end of your collarbone.
The most common cause of a separated shoulder is a blow to the point of your shoulder or a fall directly on your shoulder. The injury may stretch or tear the ligaments that hold your collarbone to your shoulder blade.
Participating in contact sports, such as football and hockey, or in sports that can involve falls — such as downhill skiing, gymnastics and volleyball — might put you at higher risk of a separated shoulder.
Most people fully recover from a separated shoulder with conservative treatment. Continued shoulder pain is possible, however, if: You have a severe separation that involves significant displacement or fracture of the collarbone, You develop arthritis in your shoulder, Other structures around your shoulder, such as the rotator cuff, are damaged.
Separation anxiety disorder is diagnosed when symptoms are excessive for the developmental age and cause significant distress in daily functioning. Symptoms may include: Recurrent and excessive distress about anticipating or being away from home or loved ones, Constant, excessive worry about losing a parent or other loved one to an illness or a disaster, Constant worry that something bad will happen, such as being lost or kidnapped, causing separation from parents or other loved ones, Refusing to be away from home because of fear of separation, Not wanting to be home alone and without a parent or other loved one in the house, Reluctance or refusing to sleep away from home without a parent or other loved one nearby, Repeated nightmares about separation, Frequent complaints of headaches, stomachaches or other symptoms when separation from a parent or other loved one is anticipated.
Separation anxiety disorder may be associated with panic disorder and panic attacks ― repeated episodes of sudden feelings of intense anxiety and fear or terror that reach a peak within minutes.
Separation anxiety disorder usually won't go away without treatment and can lead to panic disorder and other anxiety disorders into adulthood.
If you have concerns about your child's separation anxiety, talk to your child's pediatrician or other health care provider.
Sometimes, separation anxiety disorder can be triggered by life stress that results in separation from a loved one. Genetics may also play a role in developing the disorder.
Separation anxiety disorder most often begins in childhood, but may continue into the teenage years and sometimes into adulthood.
Risk factors may include: Life stresses or loss that result in separation, such as the illness or death of a loved one, loss of a beloved pet, divorce of parents, or moving or going away to school, Certain temperaments, which are more prone to anxiety disorders than others are, Family history, including blood relatives who have problems with anxiety or an anxiety disorder, indicating that those traits could be inherited, Environmental issues, such as experiencing some type of disaster that involves separation.
Separation anxiety disorder causes major distress and problems functioning in social situations or at work or school.
Disorders that can accompany separation anxiety disorder include: Other anxiety disorders, such as generalized anxiety disorder, panic attacks, phobias, social anxiety disorder or agoraphobia, Obsessive-compulsive disorder, Depression.
To be diagnosed with sepsis, you must have a probable or confirmed infection and all of the following signs: Change in mental status, A first (upper) number in a blood pressure reading — also called the systolic pressure — that's less than or equal to 100 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), Respiratory rate higher than or equal to 22 breaths a minute.
Sepsis can progress to septic shock when certain changes in the circulatory system, the body's cells and how the body uses energy become more abnormal. Septic shock is more likely to cause death than sepsis is. To be diagnosed with septic shock, you must have a probable or confirmed infection and both of the following:
The need for medication to maintain blood pressure greater than or equal to 65 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg).
High levels of lactic acid in your blood (serum lactate) after you have received adequate fluid replacement. Having too much lactic acid in your blood means that your cells aren't using oxygen properly.
Most often, sepsis occurs in people who are hospitalized or who have recently been hospitalized. People in the intensive care unit are especially vulnerable to developing infections, which can then lead to sepsis. If you develop signs and symptoms of sepsis after surgery or after being hospitalized, seek medical care immediately.
While any type of infection — bacterial, viral or fungal — can lead to sepsis, the most likely varieties include: Pneumonia, Infection of the digestive system (which includes organs such as the stomach and colon), Infection of the kidney, bladder and other parts of the urinary system, Bloodstream infection (bacteremia).
Sepsis and septic shock are more common if you: Are very young or very old, Have a compromised immune system, Have diabetes or cirrhosis, Are already very sick, often in a hospital intensive care unit, Have wounds or injuries, such as burns, Have invasive devices, such as intravenous catheters or breathing tubes, Have previously received antibiotics or corticosteroids.
Sepsis ranges from less to more severe. As sepsis worsens, blood flow to vital organs, such as your brain, heart and kidneys, becomes impaired. Sepsis can also cause blood clots to form in your organs and in your arms, legs, fingers and toes — leading to varying degrees of organ failure and tissue death (gangrene).
Most people recover from mild sepsis, but the average mortality rate for septic shock is about 40 percent. Also, an episode of severe sepsis may place you at higher risk of future infections.
Septic arthritis typically causes extreme discomfort and difficulty using the affected joint. The joint could be swollen, red and warm, and you might have a fever.
See your doctor if you have sudden onset of severe pain in a joint. Prompt treatment can help minimize joint damage.
Septic arthritis can be caused by bacterial, viral or fungal infections. Bacterial infection with Staphylococcus aureus (staph) is the most common cause. Staph commonly lives on even healthy skin.
Septic arthritis can develop when an infection, such as a skin infection or urinary tract infection, spreads through your bloodstream to a joint. Less commonly, a puncture wound, drug injection, or surgery in or near a joint can give the germs entry into the joint space.
The lining of your joints (synovium) has little ability to protect itself from infection. Your body's reaction to the infection — including inflammation that can increase pressure and reduce blood flow within the joint — contributes to the damage.
Risk factors for septic arthritis include:
Existing joint problems. Chronic diseases and conditions that affect your joints — such as osteoarthritis, gout, rheumatoid arthritis or lupus — can increase your risk of septic arthritis, as can an artificial joint, previous joint surgery and joint injury.
Taking medications for rheumatoid arthritis. People with rheumatoid arthritis have a further increase in risk because of medications they take that can suppress the immune system, making infections more likely to occur. Diagnosing septic arthritis in people with rheumatoid arthritis is difficult because many of the signs and symptoms are similar.
Skin fragility. Skin that breaks easily and heals poorly can give bacteria access to your body. Skin conditions such as psoriasis and eczema increase your risk of septic arthritis, as do infected skin wounds. People who regularly inject drugs also have a higher risk of infection at the site of injection.
Weak immune system. People with a weak immune system are at greater risk of septic arthritis. This includes people with diabetes, kidney and liver problems, and those taking drugs that suppress their immune systems.
Joint trauma. Animal bites, puncture wounds or cuts over a joint can put you at risk of septic arthritis.
Having a combination of risk factors puts you at greater risk than having just one risk factor does.
If treatment is delayed, septic arthritis can lead to joint degeneration and permanent damage.
Serotonin syndrome symptoms usually occur within several hours of taking a new drug or increasing the dose of a drug you're already taking.
Signs and symptoms include: Agitation or restlessness, Confusion, Rapid heart rate and high blood pressure, Dilated pupils, Loss of muscle coordination or twitching muscles, Muscle rigidity, Heavy sweating, Diarrhea, Headache, Shivering, Goose bumps.
Severe serotonin syndrome can be life-threatening. Signs include: High fever, Seizures, Irregular heartbeat, Unconsciousness.
If you suspect you might have serotonin syndrome after starting a new drug or increasing the dose of a drug you're already taking, call your doctor right away or go to the emergency room. If you have severe or rapidly worsening symptoms, seek emergency treatment immediately.
Excessive accumulation of serotonin in your body creates the symptoms of serotonin syndrome.
Under normal circumstances, nerve cells in your brain and spinal cord produce serotonin that helps regulate your attention, behavior and body temperature.
Other nerve cells in your body, primarily in your intestines, also produce serotonin. Serotonin plays a role in regulating your digestive process, blood flow and breathing.
Although it's possible that taking just one drug that increases serotonin levels can cause serotonin syndrome in susceptible individuals, this condition occurs most often when you combine certain medications.
For example, serotonin syndrome may occur if you take an antidepressant with a migraine medication. It may also occur if you take an antidepressant with an opioid pain medication.
Another cause of serotonin syndrome is intentional overdose of antidepressant medications.
A number of over-the-counter and prescription drugs may be associated with serotonin syndrome, especially antidepressants. Illicit drugs and dietary supplements also may be associated with the condition.
The drugs and supplements that could potentially cause serotonin syndrome include: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), antidepressants such as citalopram (Celexa), fluoxetine (Prozac, Sarafem), fluvoxamine, paroxetine (Paxil, Pexeva, Brisdelle) and sertraline (Zoloft), Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), antidepressants such as duloxetine (Cymbalta, Drizalma Sprinkle) and venlafaxine (Effexor XR), Bupropion (Zyban, Wellbutrin SR, Wellbutrin XL), an antidepressant and tobacco-addiction medication, Tricyclic antidepressants, such as amitriptyline and nortriptyline (Pamelor), Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), antidepressants such as isocarboxazid (Marplan) and phenelzine (Nardil), Anti-migraine medications, such as carbamazepine (Tegretol, Carbatrol, others), valproic acid (Depakene) and triptans, which include almotriptan, naratriptan (Amerge) and sumatriptan (Imitrex, Tosymra, others), Pain medications, such as opioid pain medications including codeine, fentanyl (Duragesic, Abstral, others), hydrocodone (Hysingla ER, Zohydro ER), meperidine (Demerol), oxycodone (Oxycontin, Roxicodone, others) and tramadol (Ultram, ConZip), Lithium (Lithobid), a mood stabilizer, Illicit drugs, including LSD, ecstasy, cocaine and amphetamines, Herbal supplements, including St. John's wort, ginseng and nutmeg, Over-the-counter cough and cold medications containing dextromethorphan (Delsym), Anti-nausea medications such as granisetron (Sancuso, Sustol), metoclopramide (Reglan), droperidol (Inapsine) and ondansetron (Zofran, Zuplenz), Linezolid (Zyvox), an antibiotic, Ritonavir (Norvir), an anti-retroviral medication used to treat HIV.
Some people are more susceptible to the drugs and supplements that cause serotonin syndrome than are others, but the condition can occur in anyone.
You're at increased risk of serotonin syndrome if: You recently started taking or increased the dose of a medication known to increase serotonin levels, You take more than one drug known to increase serotonin levels, You take herbal supplements known to increase serotonin levels, You use an illicit drug known to increase serotonin levels.
Serotonin syndrome generally doesn't cause any problems once serotonin levels are back to normal.
If left untreated, severe serotonin syndrome can lead to unconsciousness and death.
SARS usually begins with flu-like signs and symptoms — fever, chills, muscle aches, headache and occasionally diarrhea. After about a week, signs and symptoms include: Fever of 100.5 F (38 C) or higher, Dry cough, Shortness of breath.
SARS is a serious illness that can lead to death. If you have signs or symptoms of a respiratory infection, or if you have flu-like signs and symptoms with fever after traveling abroad, see your doctor right away.
SARS is caused by a strain of coronavirus, the same family of viruses that causes the common cold. Previously, these viruses had never been particularly dangerous to humans.
Coronaviruses can, however, cause severe disease in animals, and that's why scientists suspected that the SARS virus might have crossed from animals to humans. It now seems likely that that the virus evolved from one or more animal viruses into a new strain.
Most respiratory illnesses, including SARS, spread through droplets that enter the air when someone with the disease coughs, sneezes or talks. Most experts think SARS spreads mainly through close personal contact, such as caring for someone with SARS. The virus may also be spread on contaminated objects — such as doorknobs, telephones and elevator buttons.
In general, people at greatest risk of SARS are those who have had direct, close contact with someone who's infected, such as family members and health care workers.
Many people with SARS develop pneumonia, and breathing problems can become so severe that a mechanical respirator is needed. SARS is fatal in some cases, often due to respiratory failure. Other possible complications include heart and liver failure.
People older than 60 — especially those with underlying conditions such as diabetes or hepatitis — are at the highest risk of serious complications.
There are two types of sex headaches: A dull ache in the head and neck that intensifies as sexual excitement increases, A sudden, severe, throbbing headache that occurs just before or at the moment of orgasm.
In some people, both types of headaches are combined.
Most sex headaches last at least several minutes. Others may linger for hours or even two to three days.
Many people who have sex headaches will experience them in clusters over a few months, and then they may go for a year or more without having any sex headaches. Up to half of all people with sex headaches experience them over the course of about six months. Some people may only have one attack during their lives.
Sex headaches aren't usually a cause for concern. But consult your doctor right away if you experience a headache during sexual activity — especially if it begins abruptly or it's your first headache of this type.
Any type of sexual activity that leads to orgasm can trigger sex headaches.
Abrupt-onset and slow-to-build sex headaches can be primary headache disorders not associated with any underlying condition. Sex headaches that come on suddenly are more likely to be associated with: A widening or bubble in the wall of an artery inside your head (intracranial aneurysm), An abnormal connection between arteries and veins in the brain (arteriovenous malformation) that bleeds into the spinal fluid-filled space in and around the brain, Bleeding into the wall of an artery leading to the brain (dissection), Stroke, Coronary artery disease, Use of some medications, such as birth control pills, Inflammation from certain infections.
Sex headaches associated with loss of consciousness, vomiting, stiff neck, other neurological symptoms and severe pain lasting more than 24 hours are more likely to be due to an underlying cause.
Sex headaches can affect anyone. But risk factors for these headaches include:
Being male. Men are more prone to having sex headaches.
History of migraines. Being prone to migraines increases your risk of sex headaches.
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) or sexually transmitted infections (STIs) can have a range of signs and symptoms, including no symptoms. That's why they may go unnoticed until complications occur or a partner is diagnosed. Signs and symptoms that might indicate an STI include: Sores or bumps on the genitals or in the oral or rectal area, Painful or burning urination, Discharge from the penis, Unusual or odd-smelling vaginal discharge, Unusual vaginal bleeding, Pain during sex, Sore, swollen lymph nodes, particularly in the groin but sometimes more widespread, Lower abdominal pain, Fever, Rash over the trunk, hands or feet.
Signs and symptoms may appear a few days after exposure, or it may take years before you have any noticeable problems, depending on the organism.
See a doctor immediately if: You are sexually active and may have been exposed to an STI, You have signs and symptoms of an STI.
Make an appointment with a doctor: When you consider becoming sexually active or when you're 21 — whichever comes first, Before you start having sex with a new partner.
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) or sexually transmitted infections (STIs) can be caused by: Bacteria (gonorrhea, syphilis, chlamydia), Parasites (trichomoniasis), Viruses (human papillomavirus, genital herpes, HIV).
Sexual activity plays a role in spreading many other kinds of infections, although it's possible to be infected without sexual contact. Examples include the hepatitis A, B and C viruses, shigella, and Giardia intestinalis.
Anyone who is sexually active risks some degree of exposure to a sexually transmitted disease (STD) or a sexually transmitted infection (STI). Factors that may increase that risk include:
Having unprotected sex. Vaginal or anal penetration by an infected partner who isn't wearing a latex condom significantly increases the risk of getting an STI. Improper or inconsistent use of condoms can also increase your risk.
Oral sex may be less risky, but infections can still be transmitted without a latex condom or a dental dam — a thin, square piece of rubber made with latex or silicone.
Having sexual contact with multiple partners. The more people you have sexual contact with, the greater your risk. This is true for concurrent partners as well as monogamous consecutive relationships.
Having a history of STIs. Having one STI makes it much easier for another STI to take hold.
Anyone forced to have sexual intercourse or sexual activity. Dealing with rape or assault can be difficult, but it's important to see a doctor as soon as possible so that you can receive screening, treatment and emotional support.
Misuse of alcohol or use of recreational drugs. Substance misuse can inhibit your judgment, making you more willing to participate in risky behaviors.
Injecting drugs. Needle sharing spreads many serious infections, including HIV, hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
Being young. Half the STIs occur in people between the ages of 15 and 24.
Men who request prescriptions for drugs to treat erectile dysfunction. Men who ask their doctors for prescriptions for drugs such as sildenafil (Viagra, Revatio), tadalafil (Cialis, Adcirca) and vardenafil (Levitra) have higher rates of STIs. Be sure you are up to date on safe sex practices if you ask your doctor for one of these medications.
Certain STIs — such as gonorrhea, chlamydia, HIV and syphilis — can be passed from an infected mother to her child during pregnancy or delivery. STIs in infants can cause serious problems or even death. All pregnant women should be screened for these infections and treated.
Because many people in the early stages of a sexually transmitted disease (STD) or sexually transmitted infection (STI) experience no symptoms, screening for STIs is important in preventing complications.
Possible complications include: Pelvic pain, Pregnancy complications, Eye inflammation, Arthritis, Pelvic inflammatory disease, Infertility, Heart disease, Certain cancers, such as HPV-associated cervical and rectal cancers.
Shaken baby syndrome symptoms and signs include: Extreme fussiness or irritability, Difficulty staying awake, Breathing problems, Poor eating, Vomiting, Pale or bluish skin, Seizures, Paralysis, Coma.
You may not see any signs of physical injury to the child's outer body. Sometimes, the face is bruised. Injuries that might not be immediately seen include bleeding in the brain and eyes, spinal cord damage, and fractures of the ribs, skull, legs and other bones. Many children with shaken baby syndrome show signs and symptoms of prior child abuse.
In mild cases of shaken baby syndrome, a child may appear normal after being shaken, but over time he or she may develop health or behavioral problems.
Seek immediate help if you suspect your child has been injured by violent shaking. Contact your child's doctor or take your child to the nearest emergency room. Getting medical care right away may save your child's life or prevent serious health problems.
Health care professionals are legally required to report all suspected cases of child abuse to state authorities.
Babies have weak neck muscles and often struggle to support their heavy heads. If a baby is forcefully shaken, his or her fragile brain moves back and forth inside the skull. This causes bruising, swelling and bleeding.
Shaken baby syndrome usually occurs when a parent or caregiver severely shakes a baby or toddler due to frustration or anger — often because the child won't stop crying.
Shaken baby syndrome isn't usually caused by bouncing a child on your knee, minor falls or even rough play.
The following things may make parents or caregivers more likely to forcefully shake a baby and cause shaken baby syndrome: Unrealistic expectations of babies, Young or single parenthood, Stress, Domestic violence, Alcohol or substance abuse, Unstable family situations, Depression, A history of mistreatment as a child.
Also, men are more likely to cause shaken baby syndrome than are women.
Even brief shaking of an infant can cause irreversible brain damage. Many children affected by shaken baby syndrome die.
Survivors of shaken baby syndrome may require lifelong medical care for conditions such as: Partial or total blindness, Developmental delays, learning problems or behavior issues, Intellectual disability, Seizure disorders, Cerebral palsy.
Signs and symptoms of Sheehan's syndrome typically appear slowly, after a period of months or years. But sometimes problems appear right away, such as the inability to breast-feed.
Signs and symptoms of Sheehan's syndrome occur because of having too little of the hormones the pituitary gland produces. Signs and symptoms include: Difficulty breast-feeding or an inability to breast-feed, No menstrual periods or infrequent menstruation, Inability to regrow shaved pubic hair, Slowed mental function, weight gain and difficulty staying warm as a result of an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), Low blood pressure, Low blood sugar, Fatigue, Irregular heartbeat, Breast shrinkage.
For many women, Sheehan's syndrome symptoms are often thought to be caused by other things. Fatigue, for instance, is commonly experienced by new mothers. You might not realize you have Sheehan's syndrome until you need treatment for thyroid or adrenal insufficiency.
It's also possible to remain relatively symptom-free if you have Sheehan's syndrome, depending on the extent of damage to the pituitary gland. Some women live for years without knowing that their pituitary gland isn't working properly. Then an extreme physical stressor, such as severe infection or surgery, triggers an adrenal crisis, a serious condition in which your adrenal glands produce too little of the hormone cortisol.
Sheehan's syndrome is caused by severe blood loss or extremely low blood pressure during or after childbirth. These factors can be particularly damaging to the pituitary gland, which enlarges during pregnancy, destroying hormone-producing tissue so that the gland can't function normally.
Pituitary hormones regulate the rest of your endocrine system, signaling other glands to increase or decrease production of the hormones that control metabolism, fertility, blood pressure, breast milk production and many other vital processes. A lack of any of these hormones can cause problems throughout the body.
Hormones from the front of your pituitary gland include:
Growth hormone (GH). This hormone controls bone and tissue growth and maintains the right balance of muscle and fat tissue.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). This hormone stimulates your thyroid gland to produce key hormones that regulate your metabolism. Shortage of TSH results in an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism).
Luteinizing hormone (LH). In women, LH regulates estrogen.
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). Working with LH, FSH helps stimulate egg development and ovulation in women.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). This hormone stimulates your adrenal glands to produce cortisol and other hormones. Cortisol helps your body deal with stress and influences many body functions, including blood pressure, heart function and your immune system.
A low level of adrenal hormones caused by damage to the pituitary gland is called secondary adrenal insufficiency.
Prolactin. This hormone regulates the development of female breasts, as well as the production of breast milk.
Any condition that increases the chance of severe blood loss (hemorrhage) or low blood pressure during childbirth, such as being pregnant with multiples or having a problem with the placenta, can increase the risk of Sheehan's syndrome.
Hemorrhage is a rare childbirth complication, however, and Sheehan's syndrome is even more uncommon. Both risks are greatly reduced with proper care and monitoring during labor and delivery.
Shellfish allergy symptoms generally develop within minutes to an hour of eating shellfish. They may include: Hives, itching or eczema (atopic dermatitis), Swelling of the lips, face, tongue and throat, or other parts of the body, Wheezing, nasal congestion or trouble breathing, Abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, Dizziness, lightheadedness or fainting.
Allergies can cause a severe, potentially life-threatening reaction known as anaphylaxis. An anaphylactic reaction to shellfish or anything else is a medical emergency that requires treatment with an epinephrine (adrenaline) injection and a trip to the emergency room.
Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include: A swollen throat or a lump in your throat (airway constriction) that makes it difficult for you to breathe, Shock, with a severe drop in your blood pressure, Dizziness, lightheadedness or loss of consciousness.
Seek emergency treatment if you develop signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis.
See a doctor or allergy specialist if you have food allergy symptoms shortly after eating.
All food allergies are caused by an immune system overreaction. In shellfish allergy, your immune system mistakenly identifies a certain protein in shellfish as harmful, triggering the production of antibodies to the shellfish protein (allergen). The next time you come in contact with the allergen, your immune system releases histamine and other chemicals that cause allergy symptoms.
There are several types of shellfish, each containing different proteins:
Crustaceans include crabs, lobster, crayfish, shrimp and prawn.
Mollusks include squid, snails, clams, oysters and scallops.
Some people are allergic to only one type of shellfish but can eat others. Other people with shellfish allergy must avoid all shellfish.
You're at increased risk of developing a shellfish allergy if allergies of any type are common in your family.
Though people of any age can develop a shellfish allergy, it's more common in adults. Among adults, shellfish allergy is more common in women. Among children, shellfish allergy is more common in boys.
In severe cases, shellfish allergy can lead to anaphylaxis, a dangerous allergic reaction marked by a swollen throat (airway constriction), rapid pulse, shock, and dizziness or lightheadedness. Anaphylaxis can be life-threatening.
When you have shellfish allergy, you may be at increased risk of anaphylaxis if: You have asthma, You have allergic reactions to very small amounts of shellfish (extreme sensitivity), You have a history of food-induced anaphylaxis.
Anaphylaxis can be treated with an emergency injection of epinephrine (adrenaline). If you are at risk of having a severe allergic reaction to shellfish, you always should carry injectable epinephrine (EpiPen, Adrenaclick, others).
Signs and symptoms of shigella infection usually begin a day or two after contact with shigella, but may take up to a week to develop. Signs and symptoms may include: Diarrhea (often containing blood or mucus), Abdominal pain or cramps, Fever.
Although some people have no symptoms after they've been infected with shigella, their feces may still be contagious up to a few weeks.
Contact your doctor or seek urgent care if you or your child has bloody diarrhea or diarrhea severe enough to cause weight loss and dehydration. Also, contact your doctor if you or your child has diarrhea and a fever of 101 F (38 C) or higher.
Infection occurs when you accidentally swallow shigella bacteria. This can happen when you:
Touch your mouth. If you don't wash your hands well after changing the diaper of a child who has shigella infection, you may become infected yourself. Direct person-to-person contact is the most common way the disease is spread.
Eat contaminated food. Infected people who handle food can transmit the bacteria to people who eat the food. Food can also become contaminated if it grows in a field that contains sewage.
Swallow contaminated water. Water may become contaminated either from sewage or from a person with shigella infection swimming in it.
Age. Children under age 5 are most likely to get shigella infection, but it can occur at any age.
Living arrangements and activities. Close contact with other people spreads the bacteria from person to person. Shigella outbreaks are more common in child care centers, community wading pools, nursing homes, jails and military barracks.
Time spent in areas that lack sanitation. People who live or travel in developing countries are more likely to contract shigella infection.
Men who have sex with men. Men who have sex with men are at higher risk because of direct or indirect oral-anal contact.
Shigella infection usually clears up without complications, although it may take weeks or months before your bowel habits return to normal.
Complications may include:
Dehydration. Persistent diarrhea can cause dehydration. Symptoms include lightheadedness, dizziness, lack of tears in children, sunken eyes and dry diapers. Severe dehydration can lead to shock and death.
Seizures. Some children who run high fevers with a shigella infection have seizures. It's not known whether the convulsions are a result of the fever or the shigella infection itself. If your child has a seizure, contact your doctor immediately.
Rectal prolapse. In this condition, straining during bowel movements may cause the mucous membrane or lining of the rectum to move out through the anus.
Hemolytic uremic syndrome. This rare complication of shigella, more commonly caused by bacteria called E. coli, can lead to a low red blood cell count (hemolytic anemia), low platelet count (thrombocytopenia) and acute kidney failure.
Toxic megacolon. This rare complication occurs when your colon becomes paralyzed, preventing you from having a bowel movement or passing gas. Signs and symptoms include abdominal pain and swelling, fever, and weakness. If you don't receive treatment for toxic megacolon, your colon may break open (rupture), causing peritonitis, a life-threatening infection requiring emergency surgery.
Reactive arthritis. Reactive arthritis develops in response to an infection. Signs and symptoms include joint pain and inflammation, usually in the ankles, knees, feet and hips; redness, itching and discharge in one or both eyes (conjunctivitis); and painful urination (urethritis).
If you have shin splints, you might notice tenderness, soreness or pain along the inner side of your shinbone and mild swelling in your lower leg. At first, the pain might stop when you stop exercising. Eventually, however, the pain can be continuous and might progress to a stress reaction or stress fracture.
Consult your doctor if rest, ice and over-the-counter pain relievers don't ease your shin pain.
Shin splints are caused by repetitive stress on the shinbone and the connective tissues that attach your muscles to the bone.
You're more at risk of shin splints if: You're a runner, especially one beginning a running program, You suddenly increase the duration, frequency or intensity of exercise, You run on uneven terrain, such as hills, or hard surfaces, such as concrete, You're in military training, You have flat feet or high arches.
The signs and symptoms of shingles usually affect only a small section of one side of your body. These signs and symptoms may include: Pain, burning, numbness or tingling, Sensitivity to touch, A red rash that begins a few days after the pain, Fluid-filled blisters that break open and crust over, Itching.
Some people also experience: Fever, Headache, Sensitivity to light, Fatigue.
Pain is usually the first symptom of shingles. For some, it can be intense. Depending on the location of the pain, it can sometimes be mistaken for a symptom of problems affecting the heart, lungs or kidneys. Some people experience shingles pain without ever developing the rash.
Most commonly, the shingles rash develops as a stripe of blisters that wraps around either the left or right side of your torso. Sometimes the shingles rash occurs around one eye or on one side of the neck or face.
Contact your doctor promptly if you suspect shingles, but especially in the following situations:
The pain and rash occur near an eye. If left untreated, this infection can lead to permanent eye damage.
You're 60 or older, because age significantly increases your risk of complications.
You or someone in your family has a weakened immune system (due to cancer, medications or chronic illness).
The rash is widespread and painful.
Shingles is caused by the varicella-zoster virus — the same virus that causes chickenpox. Anyone who's had chickenpox may develop shingles. After you recover from chickenpox, the virus enters your nervous system and lies dormant for years.
Eventually, it may reactivate and travel along nerve pathways to your skin — producing shingles. But, not everyone who's had chickenpox will develop shingles.
The reason for shingles is unclear. But it may be due to lowered immunity to infections as you grow older. Shingles is more common in older adults and in people who have weakened immune systems.
Varicella-zoster is part of a group of viruses called herpes viruses, which includes the viruses that cause cold sores and genital herpes. Because of this, shingles is also known as herpes zoster. But the virus that causes chickenpox and shingles is not the same virus responsible for cold sores or genital herpes, a sexually transmitted infection.
A person with shingles can pass the varicella-zoster virus to anyone who isn't immune to chickenpox. This usually occurs through direct contact with the open sores of the shingles rash. Once infected, the person will develop chickenpox, however, not shingles.
Chickenpox can be dangerous for some people. Until your shingles blisters scab over, you are contagious and should avoid physical contact with anyone who hasn't yet had chickenpox or the chickenpox vaccine, especially people with weakened immune systems, pregnant women and newborns.
Anyone who has ever had chickenpox can develop shingles. Most adults in the United States had chickenpox when they were children, before the advent of the routine childhood vaccination that now protects against chickenpox.
Factors that may increase your risk of developing shingles include:
Being older than 50. Shingles is most common in people older than 50. The risk increases with age.
Having certain diseases. Diseases that weaken your immune system, such as HIV/AIDS and cancer, can increase your risk of shingles.
Undergoing cancer treatments. Radiation or chemotherapy can lower your resistance to diseases and may trigger shingles.
Taking certain medications. Drugs designed to prevent rejection of transplanted organs can increase your risk of shingles — as can prolonged use of steroids, such as prednisone.
Complications from shingles can include:
Postherpetic neuralgia. For some people, shingles pain continues long after the blisters have cleared. This condition is known as postherpetic neuralgia, and it occurs when damaged nerve fibers send confused and exaggerated messages of pain from your skin to your brain.
Vision loss. Shingles in or around an eye (ophthalmic shingles) can cause painful eye infections that may result in vision loss.
Neurological problems. Depending on which nerves are affected, shingles can cause an inflammation of the brain (encephalitis), facial paralysis, or hearing or balance problems.
Skin infections. If shingles blisters aren't properly treated, bacterial skin infections may develop.
Common signs and symptoms of short bowel syndrome may include: Diarrhea, Greasy, foul-smelling stools, Fatigue, Weight loss, Malnutrition, Swelling (edema) in the lower extremities.
Causes of short bowel syndrome include having parts of your small intestine removed during surgery, or being born with some of the small intestine missing or damaged. Conditions that may require surgical removal of portions of the small intestine include Crohn's disease, cancer, injuries and blood clots.
Most people with sick sinus syndrome have few or no symptoms. Symptoms may be mild or come and go — making them difficult to recognize at first.
Signs and symptoms of sick sinus syndrome may include: Fatigue, Dizziness or lightheadedness, Fainting or near fainting, Shortness of breath, Chest pain or discomfort, Confusion, Slower than normal pulse (bradycardia), A sensation of rapid, fluttering heartbeats (palpitations).
Talk to your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms of sick sinus syndrome. Many medical conditions can cause these problems, and it's important to get a timely and accurate diagnosis.
If you have new or unexplained chest pain or suspect you're having a heart attack, call for emergency medical help immediately.
Your heart is made up of four chambers — two upper (atria) and two lower (ventricles). The rhythm of your heart is normally controlled by the sinus node, an area of specialized cells in the right upper heart chamber (atrium).
This natural pacemaker produces electrical signals that trigger each heartbeat. From the sinus node, electrical signals travel across the atria to the ventricles, causing them to contract and pump blood to your lungs and body.
If you have sick sinus syndrome, your sinus node isn't working properly, causing your heart rate to be too slow (bradycardia), too fast (tachycardia) or irregular.
Problems of the sinus node include the following:
Sinus bradycardia. The sinus node produces an electrical charge at a slower rate than normal.
Sinus arrest. Signals from the sinus node pause, causing skipped beats.
Sinoatrial exit block. Signals to the upper heart chambers are slowed or blocked, causing a pause or skipped beats.
Chronotropic incompetence. The heart rate is normal at rest, but doesn't increase with physical activity.
Bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome. The heart rate alternates between abnormally slow and fast rhythms, usually with a long pause (asystole) between heartbeats.
Abnormalities of the sinus node may be caused by the following: Age-related wear and tear of heart tissues, Heart disease, Inflammatory diseases affecting the heart, Damage to the sinus node or scarring from heart surgery, Medications to treat high blood pressure, including calcium channel blockers and beta blockers, Drugs to treat irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias), Some Alzheimer's disease medications, Neuromuscular diseases, such as muscular dystrophy, Obstructive sleep apnea, Rare genetic mutations.
Sick sinus syndrome can occur at any age, but it's most common in people in their 70s or older. Common heart disease risk factors may increase the risk of sick sinus syndrome: High blood pressure, High cholesterol, Excess body weight, Lack of exercise.
When your heart's natural pacemaker isn't working properly, your heart can't work as well as it should. This can lead to: Atrial fibrillation, a chaotic rhythm of the upper chambers of the heart, Heart failure, Stroke, Cardiac arrest.
Signs and symptoms of sickle cell anemia usually appear around 5 months of age. They vary from person to person and change over time. Signs and symptoms can include:
Anemia. Sickle cells break apart easily and die, leaving you with too few red blood cells. Red blood cells usually live for about 120 days before they need to be replaced. But sickle cells usually die in 10 to 20 days, leaving a shortage of red blood cells (anemia).
Without enough red blood cells, your body can't get enough oxygen, causing fatigue.
Episodes of pain. Periodic episodes of pain, called pain crises, are a major symptom of sickle cell anemia. Pain develops when sickle-shaped red blood cells block blood flow through tiny blood vessels to your chest, abdomen and joints. Pain can also occur in your bones.
The pain varies in intensity and can last for a few hours to a few weeks. Some people have only a few pain crises a year. Others have a dozen or more pain crises a year. A severe pain crisis requires a hospital stay.
Some adolescents and adults with sickle cell anemia also have chronic pain, which can result from bone and joint damage, ulcers, and other causes.
Swelling of hands and feet. The swelling is caused by sickle-shaped red blood cells blocking blood flow to the hands and feet.
Frequent infections. Sickle cells can damage your spleen, leaving you more vulnerable to infections. Doctors commonly give infants and children with sickle cell anemia vaccinations and antibiotics to prevent potentially life-threatening infections, such as pneumonia.
Delayed growth or puberty. Red blood cells provide your body with the oxygen and nutrients needed for growth. A shortage of healthy red blood cells can slow growth in infants and children and delay puberty in teenagers.
Vision problems. Tiny blood vessels that supply your eyes can become plugged with sickle cells. This can damage the retina — the portion of the eye that processes visual images — and lead to vision problems.
Sickle cell anemia is usually diagnosed in infancy through newborn screening programs. If you or your child develops any of the following problems, see your doctor right away or seek emergency medical care:
Fever. People with sickle cell anemia have an increased risk of serious infection, and fever can be the first sign of an infection.
Unexplained episodes of severe pain, such as pain in the abdomen, chest, bones or joints.
Swelling in the hands or feet.
Abdominal swelling, especially if the area is tender to the touch.
Pale skin or nail beds.
Yellow tint to the skin or whites of the eyes.
Signs or symptoms of stroke. If you notice one-sided paralysis or weakness in the face, arms or legs; confusion; trouble walking or talking; sudden vision changes or unexplained numbness; or a severe headache, call 911 or your local emergency number right away.
Sickle cell anemia is caused by a mutation in the gene that tells your body to make the iron-rich compound that makes blood red and enables red blood cells to carry oxygen from your lungs throughout your body (hemoglobin). In sickle cell anemia, the abnormal hemoglobin causes red blood cells to become rigid, sticky and misshapen.
Both mother and father must pass the defective form of the gene for a child to be affected.
If only one parent passes the sickle cell gene to the child, that child will have the sickle cell trait. With one normal hemoglobin gene and one defective form of the gene, people with the sickle cell trait make both normal hemoglobin and sickle cell hemoglobin.
Their blood might contain some sickle cells, but they generally don't have symptoms. They're carriers of the disease, however, which means they can pass the gene to their children.
For a baby to be born with sickle cell anemia, both parents must carry a sickle cell gene. In the United States, sickle cell anemia most commonly affects black people.
Sickle cell anemia can lead to a host of complications, including:
Stroke. Sickle cells can block blood flow to an area of your brain. Signs of stroke include seizures, weakness or numbness of your arms and legs, sudden speech difficulties, and loss of consciousness. If your child has any of these signs and symptoms, seek medical treatment immediately. A stroke can be fatal.
Acute chest syndrome. A lung infection or sickle cells blocking blood vessels in your lungs can cause this life-threatening complication, resulting in chest pain, fever and difficulty breathing. It might require emergency medical treatment.
Pulmonary hypertension. People with sickle cell anemia can develop high blood pressure in their lungs. This complication usually affects adults. Shortness of breath and fatigue are common symptoms of this condition, which can be fatal.
Organ damage. Sickle cells that block blood flow to organs deprive the affected organs of blood and oxygen. In sickle cell anemia, blood is also chronically low in oxygen. This lack of oxygen-rich blood can damage nerves and organs, including your kidneys, liver and spleen, and can be fatal.
Blindness. Sickle cells can block tiny blood vessels that supply your eyes. Over time, this can damage your eye and lead to blindness.
Leg ulcers. Sickle cell anemia can cause open sores on your legs.
Gallstones. The breakdown of red blood cells produces a substance called bilirubin. A high level of bilirubin in your body can lead to gallstones.
Priapism. In this condition, men with sickle cell anemia can have painful, long-lasting erections. Sickle cells can block the blood vessels in the penis, which can lead to impotence over time.
Pregnancy complications. Sickle cell anemia can increase the risk of high blood pressure and blood clots during pregnancy. It can also increase the risk of miscarriage, premature birth and having low birth weight babies.
Signs and symptoms of sinus headaches may include: Pain, pressure and fullness in your cheeks, brow or forehead, Worsening pain if you bend forward or lie down, Stuffy nose, Fatigue, Achy feeling in your upper teeth.
Migraines and headaches from sinusitis are easy to confuse because the signs and symptoms of the two types of headaches may overlap.
Both migraine and sinusitis headache pain often gets worse when you bend forward. Migraine can also be accompanied by various nasal signs and symptoms — including congestion, facial pressure and a clear, watery nasal discharge. These are due to involvement of the autonomic nervous system in a migraine attack. In fact, studies have shown that approximately 90% of people who see a doctor for sinus headaches are found to have migraines instead.
Sinusitis, however, usually isn't associated with nausea or vomiting or aggravated by noise or bright light — all common features of migraines.
Sinusitis usually occurs after a viral upper respiratory infection or cold and includes thick, discolored nasal mucus, decreased sense of smell, and pain in one cheek or upper teeth. Headaches due to sinus disease often last days or longer, and migraines most commonly last hours to a day or two.
Consult your doctor if: Your headache symptoms occur more than 15 days a month or require frequent over-the-counter pain medicine, You have a severe headache, and over-the-counter pain medicine doesn't help, You miss school or work because of frequent headaches or the headaches interfere with your daily life.
Sinus headaches are usually associated with migraines or other forms of headaches.
Sinus headaches are associated with pain and pressure in the face and sinuses and can cause nasal symptoms. Most of these headaches are not caused by sinus infections and should not be treated with antibiotics.
Sinus headaches can affect anyone but may be more likely if you have: A previous history of migraines or headaches, A family history of migraines or headaches, Hormonal changes associated with headaches.
The two main symptoms of Sjogren's syndrome are:
Dry eyes. Your eyes might burn, itch or feel gritty — as if there's sand in them.
Dry mouth. Your mouth might feel like it's full of cotton, making it difficult to swallow or speak.
Some people with Sjogren's syndrome also have one or more of the following: Joint pain, swelling and stiffness, Swollen salivary glands — particularly the set located behind your jaw and in front of your ears, Skin rashes or dry skin, Vaginal dryness, Persistent dry cough, Prolonged fatigue.
Sjogren's syndrome is an autoimmune disorder. Your immune system mistakenly attacks your body's own cells and tissues.
Scientists aren't certain why some people develop Sjogren's syndrome. Certain genes put people at higher risk of the disorder, but it appears that a triggering mechanism — such as infection with a particular virus or strain of bacteria — is also necessary.
In Sjogren's syndrome, your immune system first targets the glands that make tears and saliva. But it can also damage other parts of your body, such as: Joints, Thyroid, Kidneys, Liver, Lungs, Skin, Nerves.
Sjogren's syndrome typically occurs in people with one or more known risk factors, including:
Age. Sjogren's syndrome is usually diagnosed in people older than 40.
Sex. Women are much more likely to have Sjogren's syndrome.
Rheumatic disease. It's common for people who have Sjogren's syndrome to also have a rheumatic disease — such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus.
The most common complications of Sjogren's syndrome involve your eyes and mouth.
Dental cavities. Because saliva helps protect the teeth from the bacteria that cause cavities, you're more prone to developing cavities if your mouth is dry.
Yeast infections. People with Sjogren's syndrome are much more likely to develop oral thrush, a yeast infection in the mouth.
Vision problems. Dry eyes can lead to light sensitivity, blurred vision and corneal damage.
Less common complications might affect:
Lungs, kidneys or liver. Inflammation can cause pneumonia, bronchitis or other problems in your lungs; lead to problems with kidney function; and cause hepatitis or cirrhosis in your liver.
Lymph nodes. A small percentage of people with Sjogren's syndrome develop cancer of the lymph nodes (lymphoma).
Nerves. You might develop numbness, tingling and burning in your hands and feet (peripheral neuropathy).
Skin cancer develops primarily on areas of sun-exposed skin, including the scalp, face, lips, ears, neck, chest, arms and hands, and on the legs in women. But it can also form on areas that rarely see the light of day — your palms, beneath your fingernails or toenails, and your genital area.
Skin cancer affects people of all skin tones, including those with darker complexions. When melanoma occurs in people with dark skin tones, it's more likely to occur in areas not normally exposed to the sun, such as the palms of the hands and soles of the feet.
Basal cell carcinoma usually occurs in sun-exposed areas of your body, such as your neck or face.
Basal cell carcinoma may appear as: A pearly or waxy bump, A flat, flesh-colored or brown scar-like lesion, A bleeding or scabbing sore that heals and returns.
Most often, squamous cell carcinoma occurs on sun-exposed areas of your body, such as your face, ears and hands. People with darker skin are more likely to develop squamous cell carcinoma on areas that aren't often exposed to the sun.
Squamous cell carcinoma may appear as: A firm, red nodule, A flat lesion with a scaly, crusted surface.
Melanoma can develop anywhere on your body, in otherwise normal skin or in an existing mole that becomes cancerous. Melanoma most often appears on the face or the trunk of affected men. In women, this type of cancer most often develops on the lower legs. In both men and women, melanoma can occur on skin that hasn't been exposed to the sun.
Melanoma can affect people of any skin tone. In people with darker skin tones, melanoma tends to occur on the palms or soles, or under the fingernails or toenails.
Melanoma signs include: A large brownish spot with darker speckles, A mole that changes in color, size or feel or that bleeds, A small lesion with an irregular border and portions that appear red, pink, white, blue or blue-black, A painful lesion that itches or burns, Dark lesions on your palms, soles, fingertips or toes, or on mucous membranes lining your mouth, nose, vagina or anus.
Other, less common types of skin cancer include:
Kaposi sarcoma. This rare form of skin cancer develops in the skin's blood vessels and causes red or purple patches on the skin or mucous membranes.
Kaposi sarcoma mainly occurs in people with weakened immune systems, such as people with AIDS, and in people taking medications that suppress their natural immunity, such as people who've undergone organ transplants.
Other people with an increased risk of Kaposi sarcoma include young men living in Africa or older men of Italian or Eastern European Jewish heritage.
Merkel cell carcinoma. Merkel cell carcinoma causes firm, shiny nodules that occur on or just beneath the skin and in hair follicles. Merkel cell carcinoma is most often found on the head, neck and trunk.
Sebaceous gland carcinoma. This uncommon and aggressive cancer originates in the oil glands in the skin. Sebaceous gland carcinomas — which usually appear as hard, painless nodules — can develop anywhere, but most occur on the eyelid, where they're frequently mistaken for other eyelid problems.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice any changes to your skin that worry you. Not all skin changes are caused by skin cancer. Your doctor will investigate your skin changes to determine a cause.
Skin cancer occurs when errors (mutations) occur in the DNA of skin cells. The mutations cause the cells to grow out of control and form a mass of cancer cells.
Skin cancer begins in your skin's top layer — the epidermis. The epidermis is a thin layer that provides a protective cover of skin cells that your body continually sheds. The epidermis contains three main types of cells:
Squamous cells lie just below the outer surface and function as the skin's inner lining.
Basal cells, which produce new skin cells, sit beneath the squamous cells.
Melanocytes — which produce melanin, the pigment that gives skin its normal color — are located in the lower part of your epidermis. Melanocytes produce more melanin when you're in the sun to help protect the deeper layers of your skin.
Where your skin cancer begins determines its type and your treatment options.
Much of the damage to DNA in skin cells results from ultraviolet (UV) radiation found in sunlight and in the lights used in tanning beds. But sun exposure doesn't explain skin cancers that develop on skin not ordinarily exposed to sunlight. This indicates that other factors may contribute to your risk of skin cancer, such as being exposed to toxic substances or having a condition that weakens your immune system.
Factors that may increase your risk of skin cancer include:
Fair skin. Anyone, regardless of skin color, can get skin cancer. However, having less pigment (melanin) in your skin provides less protection from damaging UV radiation. If you have blond or red hair and light-colored eyes, and you freckle or sunburn easily, you're much more likely to develop skin cancer than is a person with darker skin.
A history of sunburns. Having had one or more blistering sunburns as a child or teenager increases your risk of developing skin cancer as an adult. Sunburns in adulthood also are a risk factor.
Excessive sun exposure. Anyone who spends considerable time in the sun may develop skin cancer, especially if the skin isn't protected by sunscreen or clothing. Tanning, including exposure to tanning lamps and beds, also puts you at risk. A tan is your skin's injury response to excessive UV radiation.
Sunny or high-altitude climates. People who live in sunny, warm climates are exposed to more sunlight than are people who live in colder climates. Living at higher elevations, where the sunlight is strongest, also exposes you to more radiation.
Moles. People who have many moles or abnormal moles called dysplastic nevi are at increased risk of skin cancer. These abnormal moles — which look irregular and are generally larger than normal moles — are more likely than others to become cancerous. If you have a history of abnormal moles, watch them regularly for changes.
Precancerous skin lesions. Having skin lesions known as actinic keratoses can increase your risk of developing skin cancer. These precancerous skin growths typically appear as rough, scaly patches that range in color from brown to dark pink. They're most common on the face, head and hands of fair-skinned people whose skin has been sun damaged.
A family history of skin cancer. If one of your parents or a sibling has had skin cancer, you may have an increased risk of the disease.
A personal history of skin cancer. If you developed skin cancer once, you're at risk of developing it again.
A weakened immune system. People with weakened immune systems have a greater risk of developing skin cancer. This includes people living with HIV/AIDS and those taking immunosuppressant drugs after an organ transplant.
Exposure to radiation. People who received radiation treatment for skin conditions such as eczema and acne may have an increased risk of skin cancer, particularly basal cell carcinoma.
Exposure to certain substances. Exposure to certain substances, such as arsenic, may increase your risk of skin cancer.
The signs and symptoms of obstructive and central sleep apneas overlap, sometimes making it difficult to determine which type you have. The most common signs and symptoms of obstructive and central sleep apneas include: Loud snoring, Episodes in which you stop breathing during sleep — which would be reported by another person, Gasping for air during sleep, Awakening with a dry mouth, Morning headache, Difficulty staying asleep (insomnia), Excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnia), Difficulty paying attention while awake, Irritability.
Loud snoring can indicate a potentially serious problem, but not everyone who has sleep apnea snores. Talk to your doctor if you have signs or symptoms of sleep apnea. Ask your doctor about any sleep problem that leaves you fatigued, sleepy and irritable.
This occurs when the muscles in the back of your throat relax. These muscles support the soft palate, the triangular piece of tissue hanging from the soft palate (uvula), the tonsils, the side walls of the throat and the tongue.
When the muscles relax, your airway narrows or closes as you breathe in. You can't get enough air, which can lower the oxygen level in your blood. Your brain senses your inability to breathe and briefly rouses you from sleep so that you can reopen your airway. This awakening is usually so brief that you don't remember it.
You might snort, choke or gasp. This pattern can repeat itself five to 30 times or more each hour, all night, impairing your ability to reach the deep, restful phases of sleep.
This less common form of sleep apnea occurs when your brain fails to transmit signals to your breathing muscles. This means that you make no effort to breathe for a short period. You might awaken with shortness of breath or have a difficult time getting to sleep or staying asleep.
Sleep apnea can affect anyone, even children. But certain factors increase your risk.
Factors that increase the risk of this form of sleep apnea include:
Excess weight. Obesity greatly increases the risk of sleep apnea. Fat deposits around your upper airway can obstruct your breathing.
Neck circumference. People with thicker necks might have narrower airways.
A narrowed airway. You might have inherited a narrow throat. Tonsils or adenoids also can enlarge and block the airway, particularly in children.
Being male. Men are two to three times more likely to have sleep apnea than are women. However, women increase their risk if they're overweight, and their risk also appears to rise after menopause.
Being older. Sleep apnea occurs significantly more often in older adults.
Family history. Having family members with sleep apnea might increase your risk.
Use of alcohol, sedatives or tranquilizers. These substances relax the muscles in your throat, which can worsen obstructive sleep apnea.
Smoking. Smokers are three times more likely to have obstructive sleep apnea than are people who've never smoked. Smoking can increase the amount of inflammation and fluid retention in the upper airway.
Nasal congestion. If you have difficulty breathing through your nose — whether from an anatomical problem or allergies — you're more likely to develop obstructive sleep apnea.
Medical conditions. Congestive heart failure, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes and Parkinson's disease are some of the conditions that may increase the risk of obstructive sleep apnea. Polycystic ovary syndrome, hormonal disorders, prior stroke and chronic lung diseases such as asthma also can increase risk.
Risk factors for this form of sleep apnea include:
Being older. Middle-aged and older people have a higher risk of central sleep apnea.
Being male. Central sleep apnea is more common in men than it is in women.
Heart disorders. Having congestive heart failure increases the risk.
Using narcotic pain medications. Opioid medications, especially long-acting ones such as methadone, increase the risk of central sleep apnea.
Stroke. Having had a stroke increases your risk of central sleep apnea or treatment-emergent central sleep apnea.
Sleep apnea is a serious medical condition. Complications can include:
Daytime fatigue. The repeated awakenings associated with sleep apnea make normal, restorative sleep impossible, making severe daytime drowsiness, fatigue and irritability likely.
You might have difficulty concentrating and find yourself falling asleep at work, while watching TV or even when driving. People with sleep apnea have an increased risk of motor vehicle and workplace accidents.
You might also feel quick-tempered, moody or depressed. Children and adolescents with sleep apnea might perform poorly in school or have behavior problems.
High blood pressure or heart problems. Sudden drops in blood oxygen levels that occur during sleep apnea increase blood pressure and strain the cardiovascular system. Having obstructive sleep apnea increases your risk of high blood pressure (hypertension).
Obstructive sleep apnea might also increase your risk of recurrent heart attack, stroke and abnormal heartbeats, such as atrial fibrillation. If you have heart disease, multiple episodes of low blood oxygen (hypoxia or hypoxemia) can lead to sudden death from an irregular heartbeat.
Type 2 diabetes. Having sleep apnea increases your risk of developing insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes.
Metabolic syndrome. This disorder, which includes high blood pressure, abnormal cholesterol levels, high blood sugar and an increased waist circumference, is linked to a higher risk of heart disease.
Complications with medications and surgery. Obstructive sleep apnea is also a concern with certain medications and general anesthesia. People with sleep apnea might be more likely to have complications after major surgery because they're prone to breathing problems, especially when sedated and lying on their backs.
Before you have surgery, tell your doctor about your sleep apnea and how it's being treated.
Liver problems. People with sleep apnea are more likely to have abnormal results on liver function tests, and their livers are more likely to show signs of scarring (nonalcoholic fatty liver disease).
Sleep-deprived partners. Loud snoring can keep anyone who sleeps near you from getting good rest. It's not uncommon for a partner to have to go to another room, or even to another floor of the house, to be able to sleep.
Symptoms of sleep disorders include being very sleepy during the daytime and having trouble falling asleep at night. Some people may fall asleep at inappropriate times, such as while driving. Other symptoms include breathing in an unusual pattern or feeling an uncomfortable urge to move while you are trying to fall asleep. Unusual or bothersome movements or experiences during sleep are also possible. Having an irregular sleep and wake cycle is another symptom of sleep disorders.
Sleep terrors differ from nightmares. The dreamer of a nightmare wakes up from the dream and may remember details, but a person who has a sleep terror episode remains asleep. Children usually don't remember anything about their sleep terrors in the morning. Adults may recall a dream fragment they had during the sleep terrors.
Sleep terrors generally occur in the first third to first half of the night, and rarely during naps. A sleep terror may lead to sleepwalking.
During a sleep terror episode, a person may: Begin with a frightening scream or shout, Sit up in bed and appear frightened, Stare wide-eyed, Sweat, breathe heavily, and have a racing pulse, flushed face and dilated pupils, Kick and thrash, Be hard to awaken, and be confused if awakened, Be inconsolable, Have no or little memory of the event the next morning, Possibly, get out of bed and run around the house or have aggressive behavior if blocked or restrained.
Occasional sleep terrors aren't usually a cause for concern. If your child has sleep terrors, you can simply mention them at a routine well-child exam. However, consult your doctor if sleep terrors: Become more frequent, Routinely disrupt the sleep of the person with sleep terrors or other family members, Lead to safety concerns or injury, Result in daytime symptoms of excessive sleepiness or problems functioning, Continue beyond the teen years or start in adulthood.
Sleep terrors are classified as a parasomnia — an undesirable behavior or experience during sleep. Sleep terrors are a disorder of arousal, meaning they occur during N3 sleep, the deepest stage of non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. Another NREM disorder is sleepwalking, which can occur together with sleep terrors.
Various factors can contribute to sleep terrors, such as: Sleep deprivation and extreme tiredness, Stress, Sleep schedule disruptions, travel or sleep interruptions, Fever.
Sleep terrors sometimes can be triggered by underlying conditions that interfere with sleep, such as: Sleep-disordered breathing — a group of disorders that include abnormal breathing patterns during sleep, the most common of which is obstructive sleep apnea, Restless legs syndrome, Some medications, Mood disorders, such as depression and anxiety, In adults, alcohol use.
Sleep terrors are more common if family members have a history of sleep terrors or sleepwalking. In children, sleep terrors are more common in females.
Some complications that may result from experiencing sleep terrors include: Excessive daytime sleepiness, which can lead to difficulties at school or work, or problems with everyday tasks, Disturbed sleep, Embarrassment about the sleep terrors or problems with relationships, Injury to oneself or rarely to someone nearby.
Sleep-related eating disorder is a parasomnia — abnormal activity or behavior that occurs while you're falling asleep, sleeping or waking up.
Episodes of sleep-related eating disorder occur in the first half of the night after you've been sleeping and include: Frequent episodes, generally nightly, of eating and drinking in an out-of-control manner, Impaired consciousness while preparing and eating food, Little or no memory of these actions the next morning, Eating high-carbohydrate and high-fat foods or odd combinations of food, Possibly eating inedible or toxic substances, such as frozen foods, coffee grounds, cleaning solutions or cigarette butts, Possibly experiencing injuries or engaging in dangerous food preparation activities, Not being easily awakened or redirected during the episode, Experiencing a negative impact on your health from the nighttime eating.
Sleep-related eating disorder can be dangerous and impact your health and safety. If you have any of the symptoms listed above, see your doctor.
Sleep-related eating disorder usually occurs during non-rapid eye movement sleep in the first half of the night and is associated with the transition from non-rapid eye movement to arousal during sleep.
The exact mechanism for why it occurs is not known, but sleep-related eating disorder often occurs in people who have a history of sleepwalking, so these conditions may be related.
Sleep-related eating disorder is more common in women and typically starts in the teenage years or the early 20s.
Increased risk of developing sleep-related eating disorder is associated with: Other sleep disorders, such as obstructive sleep apnea, sleepwalking, narcolepsy and restless legs syndrome, Hypnotic sleep medications, such as zolpidem (Ambien, Edluar, Intermezzo, Zolpimist), and certain other medications, such as antidepressants or antipsychotics, Having a daytime eating disorder, such as bulimia or anorexia, Having a mental health disorder, such as stress, anxiety or depression, Having a first-degree relative — a parent, child or sibling — with sleep-related eating disorder or sleepwalking, Experiencing sleep deprivation.
A sleep-related eating disorder can result in: Dangerous use of kitchen appliances, falls, cuts, burns, choking, injury from eating something inedible or toxic, or eating something you're allergic to, Health problems, such as weight gain, poor diabetes control or dental cavities, Feelings of guilt and helplessness over the lack of control, Daytime tiredness from disrupted sleep.
Sleepwalking usually occurs early in the night — often one to two hours after falling asleep. It's unlikely to occur during naps. A sleepwalking episode can occur rarely or often, and an episode generally lasts several minutes, but can last longer.
Someone who is sleepwalking may: Get out of bed and walk around, Sit up in bed and open his or her eyes, Have a glazed, glassy-eyed expression, Not respond or communicate with others, Be difficult to wake up during an episode, Be disoriented or confused for a short time after being awakened, Not remember the episode in the morning, Have problems functioning during the day because of disturbed sleep, Have sleep terrors in addition to sleepwalking.
Sometimes, a person who is sleepwalking will: Do routine activities, such as getting dressed, talking or eating, Leave the house, Drive a car, Engage in unusual behavior, such as urinating in a closet, Engage in sexual activity without awareness, Get injured, for example, by falling down the stairs or jumping out a window, Become violent during the period of brief confusion immediately after waking or, occasionally, during sleepwalking.
Occasional episodes of sleepwalking aren't usually a cause for concern and typically resolve on their own. You can simply mention the sleepwalking at a routine physical or well-child exam. However, consult your doctor if the sleepwalking episodes: Occur often — for example, more than one to two times a week or several times a night, Lead to dangerous behavior or injury to the person who sleepwalks or to others, Cause significant sleep disruption to household members or the person who sleepwalks, Result in daytime symptoms of excessive sleepiness or problems functioning, Start for the first time as an adult, Continue into your child's teen years.
Sleepwalking is classified as a parasomnia — an undesirable behavior or experience during sleep. Sleepwalking is a disorder of arousal, meaning it occurs during N3 sleep, the deepest stage of non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. Another NREM disorder is sleep terrors, which can occur together with sleepwalking.
Many factors can contribute to sleepwalking, including: Sleep deprivation, Stress, Fever, Sleep schedule disruptions, travel or sleep interruptions.
Sometimes sleepwalking can by triggered by underlying conditions that interfere with sleep, such as: Sleep-disordered breathing — a group of disorders featuring abnormal breathing patterns during sleep (for example, obstructive sleep apnea), Taking certain medications, such as hypnotics, sedatives or certain medications used for psychiatric disorders, Substance use, such as alcohol, Restless legs syndrome, Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Factors that may increase the risk of sleepwalking include:
Genetics. Sleepwalking appears to run in families. It's more common if you have one parent who has a history of sleepwalking, and much more common if both parents have a history of the disorder.
Age. Sleepwalking occurs more often in children than adults, and onset in adulthood is more likely related to other underlying conditions.
Sleepwalking itself isn't necessarily a concern, but a person who sleepwalks can: Hurt themselves — especially if they walk near furniture or stairs, wander outdoors, drive a car or eat something inappropriate during a sleepwalking episode, Experience prolonged sleep disruption, which can lead to excessive daytime sleepiness and possible school or behavior issues, Be embarrassed or experience problems with social relationships, Disturb others' sleep, Rarely, injure someone else nearby.
Signs and symptoms of small bowel cancer include: Abdominal pain, Yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice), Feeling unusually weak or tired, Nausea, Vomiting, Losing weight without trying, Blood in the stool, which might appear red or black, Watery diarrhea, Skin flushing.
Doctors aren't certain what causes most small bowel cancers.
In general, small bowel cancer begins when healthy cells in the small bowel develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains a set of instructions that tell a cell what to do.
Healthy cells grow and divide in an orderly way to keep your body functioning normally. But when a cell's DNA is damaged and becomes cancerous, cells continue to divide — even when new cells aren't needed. As these cells accumulate, they form a tumor.
With time, the cancer cells can grow to invade and destroy normal tissue nearby. And cancerous cells can spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.
Factors that may increase the risk of small bowel cancer include:
Gene mutations passed through families. Some gene mutations that are inherited from your parents can increase your risk of small bowel cancer and other cancers. Examples include Lynch syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
Other bowel diseases. Other diseases and conditions that affect the intestines may increase the risk of small bowel cancer, including Crohn's disease, inflammatory bowel disease and celiac disease.
Weakened immune system. If your body's germ-fighting immune system is weakened, you may have an increased risk of small bowel cancer. Examples include people with HIV infection and those who take anti-rejection medicine after an organ transplant.
Small bowel cancer can cause complications, including:
An increased risk of other cancers. People who have small bowel cancer run a higher risk of having other types of cancers, including those that affect the colon, rectum, ovaries and the lining of the uterus (endometrium).
Cancer that spreads to other parts of the body. Advanced small bowel cancer can spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body, most often the liver.
Mild small bowel prolapse may produce no signs or symptoms. However, if you have significant prolapse, you might experience: A pulling sensation in your pelvis that eases when you lie down, A feeling of pelvic fullness, pressure or pain, Low back pain that eases when you lie down, A soft bulge of tissue in your vagina, Vaginal discomfort and painful intercourse (dyspareunia).
Many women with small bowel prolapse also experience prolapse of other pelvic organs, such as the bladder, uterus or rectum.
See your doctor if you develop signs or symptoms of prolapse that bother you.
Increased pressure on the pelvic floor is the main reason for any form of pelvic organ prolapse. Conditions and activities that can cause or contribute to small bowel prolapse or other types of prolapse include: Pregnancy and childbirth, Chronic constipation or straining with bowel movements, Chronic cough or bronchitis, Repeated heavy lifting, Being overweight or obese.
Pregnancy and childbirth are the most common causes of pelvic organ prolapse. The muscles, ligaments and fascia that hold and support your vagina stretch and weaken during pregnancy, labor and delivery.
Not everyone who has had a baby develops pelvic organ prolapse. Some women have very strong supporting muscles, ligaments and fascia in the pelvis and never have a problem. It's also possible for a woman who's never had a baby to develop pelvic organ prolapse.
Factors that increase your risk of developing small bowel prolapse include:
Pregnancy and childbirth. Vaginal delivery of one or more children contributes to the weakening of your pelvic floor support structures, increasing your risk of prolapse. The more pregnancies you have, the greater your risk of developing any type of pelvic organ prolapse. Women who have only cesarean deliveries are less likely to develop prolapse.
Age. Small bowel prolapse and other types of pelvic organ prolapse occur more often with increasing age. As you get older, you tend to lose muscle mass and muscle strength — in your pelvic muscles as well as other muscles.
Pelvic surgery. Removal of your uterus (hysterectomy) or surgical procedures to treat incontinence may increase your risk of developing small bowel prolapse.
Increased abdominal pressure. Being overweight increases pressure inside your abdomen, which increases your risk of developing small bowel prolapse. Other factors that increase pressure include ongoing (chronic) cough and straining during bowel movements.
Smoking. Smoking is associated with developing prolapse because smokers frequently cough, increasing abdominal pressure.
Race. For unknown reasons, Hispanic and white women are at higher risk of developing pelvic organ prolapse.
Connective tissue disorders. You may be genetically prone to prolapse due to weaker connective tissues in your pelvic area, making you naturally more susceptible to small bowel prolapse and other types of pelvic organ prolapse.
Signs and symptoms of SIBO often include: Loss of appetite, Abdominal pain, Nausea, Bloating, An uncomfortable feeling of fullness after eating, Diarrhea, Unintentional weight loss, Malnutrition.
Bloating, nausea and diarrhea are signs and symptoms of many intestinal problems. See your doctor for a full evaluation — especially if you've had abdominal surgery — if you have: Persistent diarrhea, Rapid, unintentional weight loss, Abdominal pain lasting more than a few days.
If you have severe abdominal pain, seek immediate medical care.
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) can be caused by: Complications of abdominal surgery, including gastric bypass for obesity and gastrectomy to treat peptic ulcers and stomach cancer, Structural problems in and around your small intestine, including scar tissue (intestinal adhesions) that can wrap around the outside of the small bowel, and bulging pouches of tissue that protrude through the wall of the small intestine (intestinal diverticulosis), Certain medical conditions, including Crohn's disease, radiation enteritis, scleroderma, celiac disease, diabetes or other conditions that can slow movement (motility) of food and waste products through the small intestine.
The small intestine is the longest section of your digestive tract, measuring about 20 feet (6.1 meters). The small intestine is where food mixes with digestive juices and nutrients are absorbed into your bloodstream.
Unlike your large intestine (colon), your small intestine normally has relatively few bacteria due to rapid flow of contents and the presence of bile. But in SIBO, stagnant food in the bypassed small intestine becomes an ideal breeding ground for bacteria. The bacteria may produce toxins as well as interfere with the absorption of nutrients. The breakdown products following bacterial digestion of food can also trigger diarrhea.
Factors that increase your risk of SIBO include: Gastric surgery for obesity or ulcers, A structural defect in the small intestine, An injury to the small intestine, An abnormal passageway (fistula) between two segments of bowel, Crohn's disease, intestinal lymphoma or scleroderma involving the small intestine, History of radiation therapy to the abdomen, Diabetes, Diverticulosis of the small intestine, Adhesions caused by previous abdominal surgery.
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) can cause escalating problems, including:
Poor absorption of fats, carbohydrates and proteins. Bile salts, which are normally needed to digest fats, are broken down by the excess bacteria in your small intestine, resulting in incomplete digestion of fats and diarrhea. Bacterial products may also harm the mucous lining (mucosa) of the small intestine, resulting in decreased absorption of carbohydrates and proteins.
Bacteria can compete for available food. And compounds produced through the bacterial break-down of stagnant food can also trigger diarrhea. Together, these effects of bacterial overgrowth result in diarrhea, malnutrition and weight loss.
Vitamin deficiency. As a result of incomplete absorption of fats, your body can't fully absorb the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K. Bacteria in the small intestine synthesize as well as use vitamin B-12, which is essential for the normal functioning of your nervous system and the production of blood cells and DNA.
The overgrowth of bacteria can result in B-12 deficiency that can lead to weakness, fatigue, tingling, and numbness in your hands and feet and, in advanced cases, to mental confusion. Damage to your central nervous system resulting from B-12 deficiency may be irreversible.
Weakened bones (osteoporosis). Over time, damage to your intestine from abnormal bacterial growth causes poor calcium absorption, and eventually may lead to bone diseases, such as osteoporosis.
Kidney stones. Poor calcium absorption may also eventually result in kidney stones.
Small vessel disease signs and symptoms include: Chest pain, squeezing or discomfort (angina), which may worsen during daily activities and times of stress, Discomfort in your left arm, jaw, neck, back or abdomen associated with chest pain, Shortness of breath, Tiredness and lack of energy.
If you've been treated for coronary artery disease with angioplasty and stents and your signs and symptoms haven't gone away, you might also have small vessel disease.
If you're having chest pain and other signs and symptoms — such as shortness of breath, sweating, nausea, dizziness, or pain that radiates beyond your chest to one or both of your arms or to your neck — seek emergency medical care.
It might be hard to tell if your symptoms are due to small vessel disease, especially if you don't have chest pain. If you do have chest pain, see your doctor to find out the cause.
Experts suspect that the causes of small vessel disease are the same as the causes for disease of the larger vessels of the heart, such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol, obesity and diabetes.
The large vessels in your heart can become narrowed or blocked through a condition in which fatty deposits build up in the arteries (atherosclerosis). In small vessel disease, damage to the small vessels affects their ability to expand (endothelial dysfunction). As a result, your heart doesn't get enough oxygen-rich blood.
Small vessel disease is more common in women. Risk factors include: Tobacco use, Unhealthy cholesterol levels, High blood pressure, Obesity (body mass index of 30 or higher), Unhealthy diet, Inactive lifestyle, Diabetes, Insulin resistance, Estrogen deficiency, in women, Polycystic ovarian syndrome, Increasing age, older than 45 in men and older than 55 in women, Chronic inflammation.
It's not clear why the same risk factors, such as obesity or an inactive lifestyle, cause some people to develop small vessel disease instead of large vessel coronary artery disease.
Because small vessel disease can make it harder for the heart to pump blood to the rest of the body, the condition, if untreated, can cause serious problems, such as: Coronary artery spasm, Heart attack, Congestive heart failure.
The first symptoms of smallpox usually appear 10 to 14 days after you're infected. During the incubation period of seven to 17 days, you look and feel healthy and can't infect others.
Following the incubation period, a sudden onset of flu-like signs and symptoms occurs. These include: Fever, Overall discomfort, Headache, Severe fatigue, Severe back pain, Vomiting, possibly.
A few days later, flat, red spots appear first on your face, hands and forearms, and later on your trunk. Within a day or two, many of these lesions turn into small blisters filled with clear fluid, which then turns into pus. Scabs begin to form eight to nine days later and eventually fall off, leaving deep, pitted scars.
Lesions also develop in the mucous membranes of your nose and mouth and quickly turn into sores that break open.
Smallpox is caused by infection with the variola virus. The virus can be transmitted:
Directly from person to person. Direct transmission of the virus requires fairly prolonged face-to-face contact. The virus can be transmitted through the air by droplets that escape when an infected person coughs, sneezes or talks.
Indirectly from an infected person. In rare instances, airborne virus can spread farther, possibly through the ventilation system in a building, infecting people in other rooms or on other floors.
Via contaminated items. Smallpox can also spread through contact with contaminated clothing and bedding, although the risk of infection from these sources is less common.
As a terrorist weapon, potentially. A deliberate release of smallpox is a remote threat. However, because any release of the virus could spread the disease quickly, government officials have taken numerous precautions to protect against this possibility, such as stockpiling smallpox vaccine.
Most people who get smallpox survive. However, a few rare varieties of smallpox are almost always fatal. These more-severe forms most commonly affect pregnant women and people with impaired immune systems.
People who recover from smallpox usually have severe scars, especially on the face, arms and legs. In some cases, smallpox may cause blindness.
Snoring is often associated with a sleep disorder called obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Not all snorers have OSA, but if snoring is accompanied by any of the following symptoms, it may be an indication to see a doctor for further evaluation for OSA: Witnessed breathing pauses during sleep, Excessive daytime sleepiness, Difficulty concentrating, Morning headaches, Sore throat upon awakening, Restless sleep, Gasping or choking at night, High blood pressure, Chest pain at night, Your snoring is so loud it's disrupting your partner's sleep, In children, poor attention span, behavioral issues or poor performance in school.
OSA often is characterized by loud snoring followed by periods of silence when breathing stops or nearly stops. Eventually, this reduction or pause in breathing may signal you to wake up, and you may awaken with a loud snort or gasping sound.
You may sleep lightly due to disrupted sleep. This pattern of breathing pauses may be repeated many times during the night.
People with obstructive sleep apnea usually experience periods when breathing slows or stops at least five times during every hour of sleep.
See your doctor if you have any of the above symptoms. These may indicate your snoring is associated with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
If your child snores, ask your pediatrician about it. Children can have OSA, too. Nose and throat problems — such as enlarged tonsils — and obesity often can narrow a child's airway, which can lead to your child developing OSA.
Snoring can be caused by a number of factors, such as the anatomy of your mouth and sinuses, alcohol consumption, allergies, a cold, and your weight.
When you doze off and progress from a light sleep to a deep sleep, the muscles in the roof of your mouth (soft palate), tongue and throat relax. The tissues in your throat can relax enough that they partially block your airway and vibrate.
The more narrowed your airway, the more forceful the airflow becomes. This increases tissue vibration, which causes your snoring to grow louder.
The following conditions can affect the airway and cause snoring:
Your mouth anatomy. Having a low, thick soft palate can narrow your airway. People who are overweight may have extra tissues in the back of their throats that may narrow their airways. Likewise, if the triangular piece of tissue hanging from the soft palate (uvula) is elongated, airflow can be obstructed and vibration increased.
Alcohol consumption. Snoring can also be brought on by consuming too much alcohol before bedtime. Alcohol relaxes throat muscles and decreases your natural defenses against airway obstruction.
Nasal problems. Chronic nasal congestion or a crooked partition between your nostrils (deviated nasal septum) may contribute to your snoring.
Sleep deprivation. Not getting enough sleep can lead to further throat relaxation.
Sleep position. Snoring is typically most frequent and loudest when sleeping on the back as gravity's effect on the throat narrows the airway.
Risk factors that may contribute to snoring include:
Being a man. Men are more likely to snore or have sleep apnea than are women.
Being overweight. People who are overweight or obese are more likely to snore or have obstructive sleep apnea.
Having a narrow airway. Some people may have a long soft palate, or large tonsils or adenoids, which can narrow the airway and cause snoring.
Drinking alcohol. Alcohol relaxes your throat muscles, increasing the risk of snoring.
Having nasal problems. If you have a structural defect in your airway, such as a deviated septum, or your nose is chronically congested, your risk of snoring is greater.
Having a family history of snoring or obstructive sleep apnea. Heredity is a potential risk factor for OSA.
Habitual snoring may be more than just a nuisance. Aside from disrupting a bed partner's sleep, if snoring is associated with OSA, you may be at risk for other complications, including: Daytime sleepiness, Frequent frustration or anger, Difficulty concentrating, A greater risk of high blood pressure, heart conditions and stroke, An increased risk of behavior problems, such as aggression or learning problems, in children with OSA, An increased risk of motor vehicle accidents due to lack of sleep.
Feelings of shyness or discomfort in certain situations aren't necessarily signs of social anxiety disorder, particularly in children. Comfort levels in social situations vary, depending on personality traits and life experiences. Some people are naturally reserved and others are more outgoing.
In contrast to everyday nervousness, social anxiety disorder includes fear, anxiety and avoidance that interfere with daily routine, work, school or other activities. Social anxiety disorder typically begins in the early to mid-teens, though it can sometimes start in younger children or in adults.
Signs and symptoms of social anxiety disorder can include persistent: Fear of situations in which you may be judged, Worrying about embarrassing or humiliating yourself, Intense fear of interacting or talking with strangers, Fear that others will notice that you look anxious, Fear of physical symptoms that may cause you embarrassment, such as blushing, sweating, trembling or having a shaky voice, Avoiding doing things or speaking to people out of fear of embarrassment, Avoiding situations where you might be the center of attention, Having anxiety in anticipation of a feared activity or event, Enduring a social situation with intense fear or anxiety, Spending time after a social situation analyzing your performance and identifying flaws in your interactions, Expecting the worst possible consequences from a negative experience during a social situation.
For children, anxiety about interacting with adults or peers may be shown by crying, having temper tantrums, clinging to parents or refusing to speak in social situations.
Performance type of social anxiety disorder is when you experience intense fear and anxiety only during speaking or performing in public, but not in other types of social situations.
Physical signs and symptoms can sometimes accompany social anxiety disorder and may include: Blushing, Fast heartbeat, Trembling, Sweating, Upset stomach or nausea, Trouble catching your breath, Dizziness or lightheadedness, Feeling that your mind has gone blank, Muscle tension.
Common, everyday experiences that may be hard to endure when you have social anxiety disorder include, for example: Interacting with unfamiliar people or strangers, Attending parties or social gatherings, Going to work or school, Starting conversations, Making eye contact, Dating, Entering a room in which people are already seated, Returning items to a store, Eating in front of others, Using a public restroom.
Social anxiety disorder symptoms can change over time. They may flare up if you're facing a lot of stress or demands. Although avoiding situations that produce anxiety may make you feel better in the short term, your anxiety is likely to continue over the long term if you don't get treatment.
See your doctor or mental health professional if you fear and avoid normal social situations because they cause embarrassment, worry or panic.
Like many other mental health conditions, social anxiety disorder likely arises from a complex interaction of biological and environmental factors. Possible causes include
Inherited traits. Anxiety disorders tend to run in families. However, it isn't entirely clear how much of this may be due to genetics and how much is due to learned behavior.
Brain structure. A structure in the brain called the amygdala (uh-MIG-duh-luh) may play a role in controlling the fear response. People who have an overactive amygdala may have a heightened fear response, causing increased anxiety in social situations.
Environment. Social anxiety disorder may be a learned behavior — some people may develop the condition after an unpleasant or embarrassing social situation. Also, there may be an association between social anxiety disorder and parents who either model anxious behavior in social situations or are more controlling or overprotective of their children.
Several factors can increase the risk of developing social anxiety disorder, including:
Family history. You're more likely to develop social anxiety disorder if your biological parents or siblings have the condition.
Negative experiences. Children who experience teasing, bullying, rejection, ridicule or humiliation may be more prone to social anxiety disorder. In addition, other negative events in life, such as family conflict, trauma or abuse, may be associated with social anxiety disorder.
Temperament. Children who are shy, timid, withdrawn or restrained when facing new situations or people may be at greater risk.
New social or work demands. Social anxiety disorder symptoms typically start in the teenage years, but meeting new people, giving a speech in public or making an important work presentation may trigger symptoms for the first time.
Having an appearance or condition that draws attention. For example, facial disfigurement, stuttering or tremors due to Parkinson's disease can increase feelings of self-consciousness and may trigger social anxiety disorder in some people.
Left untreated, social anxiety disorder can run your life. Anxieties can interfere with work, school, relationships or enjoyment of life. Social anxiety disorder can cause: Low self-esteem, Trouble being assertive, Negative self-talk, Hypersensitivity to criticism, Poor social skills, Isolation and difficult social relationships, Low academic and employment achievement, Substance abuse, such as drinking too much alcohol, Suicide or suicide attempts.
Other anxiety disorders and certain other mental health disorders, particularly major depressive disorder and substance abuse problems, often occur with social anxiety disorder.
Some signs and symptoms of soft palate cancer can include the following: Bleeding, Difficulty swallowing, Difficulty speaking, Bad breath, Mouth pain, Sores in your mouth that won't heal, Loose teeth, Pain when you swallow, Weight loss, Ear pain, Swelling in your neck that may hurt, White patches in your mouth that won't go away.
Talk to your doctor or dentist about any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
Soft palate cancer forms when a genetic mutation turns normal, healthy cells into abnormal cells. Healthy cells grow and multiply at a set rate, eventually dying at a set time. Abnormal cells grow and multiply out of control, and they don't die. The accumulating abnormal cells form a mass (tumor). Cancer cells invade nearby tissues and can separate from an initial tumor to spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.
Things that may increase the risk of soft palate cancer include: Using tobacco, Drinking alcohol, Being infected with human papillomavirus (HPV), Taking medications that suppress your immune system.
If you use tobacco and drink alcohol, your risk is even higher.
Signs and symptoms of solitary rectal ulcer syndrome include: Constipation, Rectal bleeding, Straining during bowel movements, Pain or a feeling of fullness in your pelvis, A feeling of incomplete passing of stool, Passing mucus from your rectum, Fecal incontinence, Rectal pain.
However, some people with solitary rectal ulcer syndrome may experience no symptoms.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice any signs or symptoms that worry you.
Several other conditions may cause signs and symptoms similar to those of solitary rectal ulcer syndrome. At your appointment, your doctor may recommend tests and procedures to identify or rule out causes other than solitary rectal ulcer syndrome.
It's not always clear what causes solitary rectal ulcer syndrome. Doctors believe stress or injury to the rectum may cause rectal ulcers to form.
Among the things that could injure the rectum are: Constipation or hardened stool in the rectum that's difficult to pass (impacted stool), Straining during bowel movements, A stretched rectum that comes out of the anus (rectal prolapse), Uncoordinated tightening of the pelvic floor muscles that slows blood flow to the rectum, Attempts to manually remove impacted stool, When one part of the intestine slides inside another part (intussusception).
Symptoms of somatic symptom disorder may be: Specific sensations, such as pain or shortness of breath, or more general symptoms, such as fatigue or weakness, Unrelated to any medical cause that can be identified, or related to a medical condition such as cancer or heart disease, but more significant than what's usually expected, A single symptom, multiple symptoms or varying symptoms, Mild, moderate or severe.
Pain is the most common symptom, but whatever your symptoms, you have excessive thoughts, feelings or behaviors related to those symptoms, which cause significant problems, make it difficult to function and sometimes can be disabling.
These thoughts, feelings and behaviors can include: Constant worry about potential illness, Viewing normal physical sensations as a sign of severe physical illness, Fearing that symptoms are serious, even when there is no evidence, Thinking that physical sensations are threatening or harmful, Feeling that medical evaluation and treatment have not been adequate, Fearing that physical activity may cause damage to your body, Repeatedly checking your body for abnormalities, Frequent health care visits that don't relieve your concerns or that make them worse, Being unresponsive to medical treatment or unusually sensitive to medication side effects, Having a more severe impairment than is usually expected from a medical condition.
For somatic symptom disorder, more important than the specific physical symptoms you experience is the way you interpret and react to the symptoms and how they impact your daily life.
Because physical symptoms can be related to medical problems, it's important to be evaluated by your primary care provider if you aren't sure what's causing your symptoms. If your primary care provider believes that you may have somatic symptom disorder, he or she can refer you to a mental health professional.
When physical symptoms considered to be somatic symptom disorder occur, it can be difficult to accept that a life-threatening illness has been eliminated as the cause. Symptoms cause very real distress for the person and reassurance isn't always helpful. Encourage your loved one to consider the possibility of a mental health referral to learn ways to cope with the reaction to symptoms and any disability it causes.
Physical disability may cause the person to be dependent and need extra physical care and emotional support that can exhaust caregivers and cause stress on families and relationships. If you feel overwhelmed by your role as caregiver, you may want to talk to a mental health professional to address your own needs.
The exact cause of somatic symptom disorder isn't clear, but any of these factors may play a role: Genetic and biological factors, such as an increased sensitivity to pain, Family influence, which may be genetic or environmental, or both, Personality trait of negativity, which can impact how you identify and perceive illness and bodily symptoms, Decreased awareness of or problems processing emotions, causing physical symptoms to become the focus rather than the emotional issues, Learned behavior — for example, the attention or other benefits gained from having an illness; or "pain behaviors" in response to symptoms, such as excessive avoidance of activity, which can increase your level of disability.
Risk factors for somatic symptom disorder include: Having anxiety or depression, Having a medical condition or recovering from one, Being at risk of developing a medical condition, such as having a strong family history of a disease, Experiencing stressful life events, trauma or violence, Having experienced past trauma, such as childhood sexual abuse, Having a lower level of education and socio-economic status.
Somatic symptom disorder can be associated with: Poor health, Problems functioning in daily life, including physical disability, Problems with relationships, Problems at work or unemployment, Other mental health disorders, such as anxiety, depression and personality disorders, Increased suicide risk related to depression, Financial problems due to excessive health care visits.
Symptoms of a sore throat can vary depending on the cause. Signs and symptoms might include: Pain or a scratchy sensation in the throat, Pain that worsens with swallowing or talking, Difficulty swallowing, Sore, swollen glands in your neck or jaw, Swollen, red tonsils, White patches or pus on your tonsils, A hoarse or muffled voice.
Infections causing a sore throat might result in other signs and symptoms, including: Fever, Cough, Runny nose, Sneezing, Body aches, Headache, Nausea or vomiting.
Take your child to a doctor if your child's sore throat doesn't go away with the first drink in the morning, recommends the American Academy of Pediatrics.
Get immediate care if your child has severe signs and symptoms such as: Difficulty breathing, Difficulty swallowing, Unusual drooling, which might indicate an inability to swallow.
If you're an adult, see your doctor if you have a sore throat and any of the following associated problems, according to the American Academy of Otolaryngology — Head and Neck Surgery: A sore throat that is severe or lasts longer than a week, Difficulty swallowing, Difficulty breathing, Difficulty opening your mouth, Joint pain, Earache, Rash, Fever higher than 101 F (38.3 C), Blood in your saliva or phlegm, Frequently recurring sore throats, A lump in your neck, Hoarseness lasting more than two weeks, Swelling in your neck or face.
Viruses that cause the common cold and the flu also cause most sore throats. Less often, bacterial infections cause sore throats.
Viral illnesses that cause a sore throat include: Common cold, Flu (influenza), Mono (mononucleosis), Measles, Chickenpox, Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), Croup — a common childhood illness characterized by a harsh, barking cough.
A number of bacterial infections can cause a sore throat. The most common is Streptococcus pyogenes (group A streptococcus) which causes strep throat.
Other causes of a sore throat include:
Allergies. Allergies to pet dander, molds, dust and pollen can cause a sore throat. The problem may be complicated by postnasal drip, which can irritate and inflame the throat.
Dryness. Dry indoor air can make your throat feel rough and scratchy. Breathing through your mouth — often because of chronic nasal congestion — also can cause a dry, sore throat.
Irritants. Outdoor air pollution and indoor pollution such as tobacco smoke or chemicals can cause a chronic sore throat. Chewing tobacco, drinking alcohol and eating spicy foods also can irritate your throat.
Muscle strain. You can strain muscles in your throat by yelling, talking loudly or talking for long periods without rest.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). GERD is a digestive system disorder in which stomach acids back up in the food pipe (esophagus).
Other signs or symptoms may include heartburn, hoarseness, regurgitation of stomach contents and the sensation of a lump in your throat.
HIV infection. A sore throat and other flu-like symptoms sometimes appear early after someone is infected with HIV.
Also, someone who is HIV-positive might have a chronic or recurring sore throat due to a fungal infection called oral thrush or due to a viral infection called cytomegalovirus (CMV), which can be serious in people with compromised immune systems.
Tumors. Cancerous tumors of the throat, tongue or voice box (larynx) can cause a sore throat. Other signs or symptoms may include hoarseness, difficulty swallowing, noisy breathing, a lump in the neck, and blood in saliva or phlegm.
Rarely, an infected area of tissue (abscess) in the throat or swelling of the small cartilage "lid" that covers the windpipe (epiglottitis) can cause a sore throat. Both can block the airway, creating a medical emergency.
Although anyone can get a sore throat, some factors make you more susceptible, including:
Age. Children and teens are most likely to develop sore throats. Children ages 3 to 15 are also more likely to have strep throat, the most common bacterial infection associated with a sore throat.
Exposure to tobacco smoke. Smoking and secondhand smoke can irritate the throat. The use of tobacco products also increases the risk of cancers of the mouth, throat and voice box.
Allergies. Seasonal allergies or ongoing allergic reactions to dust, molds or pet dander make developing a sore throat more likely.
Exposure to chemical irritants. Particles in the air from burning fossil fuels and common household chemicals can cause throat irritation.
Chronic or frequent sinus infections. Drainage from your nose can irritate your throat or spread infection.
Close quarters. Viral and bacterial infections spread easily anywhere people gather, whether in child care centers, classrooms, offices or airplanes.
Weakened immunity. You're more susceptible to infections in general if your resistance is low. Common causes of lowered immunity include HIV, diabetes, treatment with steroids or chemotherapy drugs, stress, fatigue, and poor diet.
For most people, soy allergy is uncomfortable but not serious. Rarely, however, an allergic reaction to soy can be frightening and even life-threatening. Signs and symptoms of a food allergy usually develop within a few minutes to hours after eating a food containing the allergen.
Soy allergy symptoms can include: Tingling in the mouth, Hives; itching; or itchy, scaly skin (eczema), Swelling of the lips, face, tongue and throat, or other body parts, Wheezing, a runny nose or breathing difficulty, Abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, Skin redness (flushing).
A severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) is rare with a soy allergy. It's more likely to occur in people who also have asthma or who are allergic to other foods besides soy, such as peanuts.
Anaphylaxis causes more-extreme signs and symptoms including: Difficulty breathing, caused by throat swelling, Shock, with a severe drop in blood pressure, Rapid pulse, Dizziness, lightheadedness or loss of consciousness.
See your primary care doctor or a doctor who specializes in treating allergies (allergist) if you experience food allergy symptoms shortly after eating. If possible, see your doctor during an allergic reaction.
Seek emergency treatment if you develop signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis, such as: Difficulty breathing, Rapid, weak pulse, Dizziness or lightheadedness, Drooling and inability to swallow, Full-body redness and warmth (flushing).
An immune system reaction causes food allergies. With a soy allergy, your immune system identifies certain soy proteins as harmful, triggering the production of immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies to the soy protein (allergen). The next time you come in contact with soy, these IgE antibodies recognize it and signal your immune system to release histamine and other chemicals into your bloodstream.
Histamine and other body chemicals cause a range of allergic signs and symptoms. Histamine is partly responsible for most allergic responses, including a runny nose, itchy eyes, dry throat, rashes and hives, nausea, diarrhea, difficulty breathing, and anaphylactic shock.
A food allergen can also cause what's sometimes called a delayed food allergy. Although any food can be a trigger, soy is one of the more common in children. The reaction, commonly vomiting and diarrhea, usually occurs within hours after eating the trigger, rather than minutes.
Unlike some food allergies, FPIES usually resolves over time. As with typical soy allergies, preventing a reaction involves avoiding foods with soy.
Certain factors may put you at greater risk of developing a soy allergy:
Family history. You're at increased risk of allergy to soy or other foods if other allergies, such as hay fever, asthma, hives or eczema, are common in your family.
Age. Soy allergy is most common in children, especially toddlers and infants.
Other allergies. In some cases, people who are allergic to wheat, beans (legumes), milk or other foods can also have an allergic reaction to soy. Also, people who are allergic to soy may have test results showing allergy to other legumes, but may be able to eat them with no problem.
If you're not nursing, ask your doctor for advice on what to feed your child until your appointment to reduce the risk of symptoms.
If you have symptoms of soy allergy, avoid foods that contain soy.
A specific phobia involves an intense, persistent fear of a specific object or situation that's out of proportion to the actual risk. There are many types of phobias, and it's not unusual to experience a specific phobia about more than one object or situation. Specific phobias can also occur along with other types of anxiety disorders.
Common categories of specific phobias are a fear of: Situations, such as airplanes, enclosed spaces or going to school, Nature, such as thunderstorms or heights, Animals or insects, such as dogs or spiders, Blood, injection or injury, such as needles, accidents or medical procedures, Others, such as choking, vomiting, loud noises or clowns.
Each specific phobia is referred to by its own term. Examples of more common terms include acrophobia for the fear of heights and claustrophobia for the fear of confined spaces.
No matter what specific phobia you have, it's likely to produce these types of reactions: An immediate feeling of intense fear, anxiety and panic when exposed to or even thinking about the source of your fear, Awareness that your fears are unreasonable or exaggerated but feeling powerless to control them, Worsening anxiety as the situation or object gets closer to you in time or physical proximity, Doing everything possible to avoid the object or situation or enduring it with intense anxiety or fear, Difficulty functioning normally because of your fear, Physical reactions and sensations, including sweating, rapid heartbeat, tight chest or difficulty breathing, Feeling nauseated, dizzy or fainting around blood or injuries, In children, possibly tantrums, clinging, crying, or refusing to leave a parent's side or approach their fear.
When to see a doctor
An unreasonable fear can be an annoyance — having to take the stairs instead of an elevator or driving the long way to work instead of taking the freeway, for instance — but it isn't considered a specific phobia unless it seriously disrupts your life. If anxiety negatively affects functioning in work, school or social situations, talk with your doctor or a mental health professional.
Childhood fears, such as fear of the dark, of monsters or of being left alone, are common, and most children outgrow them. But if your child has a persistent, excessive fear that interferes with daily functioning at home or school, talk to your child's doctor.
Most people can be helped with the right therapy. And therapy tends to be easier when the phobia is addressed right away rather than waiting.
Much is still unknown about the actual cause of specific phobias. Causes may include:
Negative experiences. Many phobias develop as a result of having a negative experience or panic attack related to a specific object or situation.
Genetics and environment. There may be a link between your own specific phobia and the phobia or anxiety of your parents — this could be due to genetics or learned behavior.
Brain function. Changes in brain functioning also may play a role in developing specific phobias.
These factors may increase your risk of specific phobias:
Your age. Specific phobias can first appear in childhood, usually by age 10, but can occur later in life.
Your relatives. If someone in your family has a specific phobia or anxiety, you're more likely to develop it, too. This could be an inherited tendency, or children may learn specific phobias by observing a family member's phobic reaction to an object or a situation.
Your temperament. Your risk may increase if you're more sensitive, more inhibited or more negative than the norm.
A negative experience. Experiencing a frightening traumatic event, such as being trapped in an elevator or attacked by an animal, may trigger the development of a specific phobia.
Learning about negative experiences. Hearing about negative information or experiences, such as plane crashes, can lead to the development of a specific phobia.
Although specific phobias may seem silly to others, they can be devastating to the people who have them, causing problems that affect many aspects of life.
Social isolation. Avoiding places and things you fear can cause academic, professional and relationship problems. Children with these disorders are at risk of academic problems and loneliness, and they may have trouble with social skills if their behaviors significantly differ from their peers.
Mood disorders. Many people with specific phobias have depression as well as other anxiety disorders.
Substance abuse. The stress of living with a severe specific phobia may lead to abuse of drugs or alcohol.
Suicide. Some individuals with specific phobias may be at risk of suicide.
A spermatocele usually causes no signs or symptoms and might remain stable in size. If it becomes large enough, however, you might feel: Pain or discomfort in the affected testicle, Heaviness in the testicle with the spermatocele, Fullness behind and above the testicle.
Because a spermatocele usually doesn't cause symptoms, you might discover it only during a testicular self-exam, or your doctor might find it during a routine physical exam.
It's a good idea to have your doctor evaluate any scrotal mass to rule out a serious condition, such as testicular cancer. Also, call your doctor if you experience pain or swelling in your scrotum. A number of conditions can cause testicular pain, and some require immediate treatment.
The cause of spermatoceles is unknown. Spermatoceles might result from a blockage in one of the multiple tubes within the epididymis that transport and store sperm from the testicle.
There aren't many known risk factors for developing a spermatocele. Men whose mothers were given the drug diethylstilbestrol (DES) during pregnancy to prevent miscarriage and other pregnancy complications appear to have a higher risk of spermatoceles. Use of this drug was stopped in 1971 due to concerns about an increased risk of rare vaginal cancer in women.
A spermatocele is unlikely to cause complications.
However, if your spermatocele is painful or has grown so large that it's causing you discomfort, you might need to have surgery to remove the spermatocele. Surgical removal might damage the epididymis or the vas deferens, a tube that transports sperm from the epididymis to the penis. Damage to either can reduce fertility. Another possible complication that can occur after surgery is that the spermatocele might come back, though this is uncommon.
Typically, a spider bite looks like any other bug bite — a red, inflamed, sometimes itchy or painful bump on your skin — and may even go unnoticed. Harmless spider bites usually don't produce any other symptoms.
Signs and symptoms of a black widow spider bite may include:
Pain and swelling. You may have pain and swelling around the bite, which can spread into your belly, back or chest.
Cramping. You may have severe stomach cramps, which are sometimes mistaken for appendicitis or a ruptured appendix.
Sweating. You may experience chills, nausea or sweating.
The pain associated with a brown recluse spider bite typically increases during the first eight hours after the bite. You may also have fever, chills and body aches. The bite usually heals on its own in about a week. Sometimes the skin at the center of the bite turns dark blue or purple, and then forms an open sore (ulcer) that gets bigger as the skin around it dies. The ulcer usually stops growing within 10 days after the bite, but full healing can take months.
Seek prompt medical care in the following situations:
You are unsure whether the bite was from a poisonous spider.
The person who was bitten experiences severe pain, abdominal cramping or a growing ulcer at the bite site.
The person who was bitten is having problems breathing.
Your doctor may recommend a tetanus booster shot if you haven't had one in the last five years.
Severe spider bite symptoms occur as a result of the venom that the spider injects. How severe the symptoms are depends on the type of spider, the amount of venom injected and how sensitive your body is to the venom.
Risk factors for spider bites are living in areas where spiders live and disturbing spiders' natural habitats. Black widow spiders and brown recluse spiders like warm climates and dark, dry places.
Black widow spiders can be found throughout the U.S., except Alaska and the far north. They prefer to live in: Sheds, Garages, Unused pots and gardening equipment, Woodpiles, Closets and cupboards during cold weather.
Brown recluse spiders are found most commonly in the southern Midwest and in limited areas of the South. Recluses are so named because they like to hide away in undisturbed areas. They mostly prefer to live indoors, in places such as: The clutter of basements or attics, Behind bookshelves and dressers, In rarely used cupboards.
Outside, they seek out dark, quiet spots, such as under rocks or in tree stumps.
Very rarely, a bite from a black widow spider or brown recluse spider may be deadly, particularly in children.
Signs and symptoms of spina bifida vary by type and severity, and also between individuals.
Spina bifida occulta. Typically there aren't any signs or symptoms because the spinal nerves aren't involved. But you can sometimes see signs on the newborn's skin above the spinal defect, including an abnormal tuft of hair, or a small dimple or birthmark. Sometimes, the skin marks can be signs of an underlying spinal cord issue that can be discovered with MRI or spinal ultrasound in a newborn.
Myelomeningocele. In this severe type of spina bifida:
The spinal canal remains open along several vertebrae in the lower or middle back
Both the membranes and the spinal cord or nerves protrude at birth, forming a sac
Tissues and nerves usually are exposed, though sometimes skin covers the sac
Typically, myelomeningocele is diagnosed before or right after birth, when medical care is available. These children should be followed by a specialized team of doctors throughout their lives, and families should be educated on the different complications to watch for.
Children with spina bifida occulta typically don't have any symptoms or complications, so usually only routine pediatric care is needed.
Doctors aren't certain what causes spina bifida. It's thought to result from a combination of genetic, nutritional and environmental risk factors, such as a family history of neural tube defects and folate (vitamin B-9) deficiency.
Spina bifida is more common among whites and Hispanics, and females are affected more often than males. Although doctors and researchers don't know for sure why spina bifida occurs, they have identified some risk factors:
Folate deficiency. Folate, the natural form of vitamin B-9, is important to the development of a healthy baby. The synthetic form, found in supplements and fortified foods, is called folic acid. A folate deficiency increases the risk of spina bifida and other neural tube defects.
Family history of neural tube defects. Couples who've had one child with a neural tube defect have a slightly higher chance of having another baby with the same defect. That risk increases if two previous children have been affected by the condition. In addition, a woman who was born with a neural tube defect has a greater chance of giving birth to a child with spina bifida. However, most babies with spina bifida are born to parents with no known family history of the condition.
Some medications. For example, anti-seizure medications, such as valproic acid (Depakene), seem to cause neural tube defects when taken during pregnancy. This might happen because they interfere with the body's ability to use folate and folic acid.
Diabetes. Women with diabetes who don't have well-controlled blood sugar have a higher risk of having a baby with spina bifida.
Obesity. Pre-pregnancy obesity is associated with an increased risk of neural tube birth defects, including spina bifida.
Increased body temperature. Some evidence suggests that increased body temperature (hyperthermia) in the early weeks of pregnancy may increase the risk of spina bifida. Elevating your core body temperature, due to fever or using a sauna or hot tub, has been associated with a possible slightly increased risk of spina bifida.
If you have known risk factors for spina bifida, talk with your doctor to determine if you need a larger dose or prescription dose of folic acid, even before a pregnancy begins.
If you take medications, tell your doctor. If you plan ahead, some medications can be adjusted to diminish the potential risk of spina bifida.
Spina bifida may cause minimal symptoms or minor physical disabilities. But severe spina bifida can lead to more significant physical disabilities. Severity is affected by: The size and location of the neural tube defect, Whether skin covers the affected area, Which spinal nerves come out of the affected area of the spinal cord.
This list of possible complications may seem overwhelming, but not all children with spina bifida get all of these complications. And these conditions can be treated.
Walking and mobility problems. The nerves that control the leg muscles don't work properly below the area of the spina bifida defect. This can cause muscle weakness of the legs and sometimes paralysis. Whether a child can walk typically depends on where the defect is, its size, and the care received before and after birth.
Orthopedic complications. Children with myelomeningocele can have a variety of problems in the legs and spine because of weak muscles in the legs and back. The types of problems depend on the location of the defect. Possible problems include orthopedic issues such as:
Curved spine (scoliosis)
Abnormal growth
Dislocation of the hip
Bone and joint deformities
Muscle contractures
Bowel and bladder problems. Nerves that supply the bladder and bowels usually don't work properly when children have myelomeningocele. This is because the nerves that supply the bowel and bladder come from the lowest level of the spinal cord.
Accumulation of fluid in the brain (hydrocephalus). Babies born with myelomeningocele commonly experience accumulation of fluid in the brain, a condition known as hydrocephalus.
Shunt malfunction. Shunts placed in the brain to treat hydrocephalus can stop working or become infected. Warning signs may vary. Some of the warning signs of a shunt that isn't working include:
Headaches
Vomiting
Sleepiness
Irritability
Swelling or redness along the shunt
Confusion
Changes in the eyes (fixed downward gaze)
Trouble feeding
Seizures
Chiari malformation type II. Chiari malformation (kee-AH-ree mal-for-MAY-shun) type II is a common brain abnormality in children with the myelomeningocele type of spina bifida. The brainstem, or lowest part of the brain above the spinal cord, is elongated and positioned lower than usual. This can cause problems with breathing and swallowing. Rarely, compression on this area of the brain occurs and surgery is needed to relieve the pressure.
Infection in the tissues surrounding the brain (meningitis). Some babies with myelomeningocele may develop meningitis, an infection in the tissues surrounding the brain. This potentially life-threatening infection may cause brain injury.
Tethered spinal cord. Tethered spinal cord results when the spinal nerves bind to the scar where the defect was closed surgically. The spinal cord is less able to grow as the child grows. This progressive tethering can cause loss of muscle function to the legs, bowel or bladder. Surgery can limit the degree of disability.
Sleep-disordered breathing. Both children and adults with spina bifida, particularly myelomeningocele, may have sleep apnea or other sleep disorders. Assessment for a sleep disorder in those with myelomeningocele helps detect sleep-disordered breathing, such as sleep apnea, which warrants treatment to improve health and quality of life.
Skin problems. Children with spina bifida may get wounds on their feet, legs, buttocks or back. They can't feel when they get a blister or sore. Sores or blisters can turn into deep wounds or foot infections that are hard to treat. Children with myelomeningocele have a higher risk of wound problems in casts.
Latex allergy. Children with spina bifida have a higher risk of latex allergy, an allergic reaction to natural rubber or latex products. Latex allergy may cause rash, sneezing, itching, watery eyes and a runny nose. It can also cause anaphylaxis, a potentially life-threatening condition in which swelling of the face and airways can make breathing difficult. So it's best to use latex-free gloves and equipment at delivery time and when caring for a child with spina bifida.
Other complications. More problems may arise as children with spina bifida get older, such as urinary tract infections, gastrointestinal (GI) disorders and depression. Children with myelomeningocele may develop learning disabilities, such as problems paying attention, and difficulty learning reading and math.
Symptoms of spinal AVM vary greatly from person to person depending on the severity and location of the AVM. Some people may not develop noticeable symptoms for many years, if at all. Others may experience symptoms that are debilitating or life-threatening.
Symptoms usually develop when people are in their 20s, although almost 20% of people diagnosed with spinal AVM are under the age of 16.
The emergence of symptoms may be sudden or gradual. Symptoms typically include: Problems with walking or climbing stairs, Numbness, tingling or sudden pain in your legs, Weakness on one or both sides of your body.
As the condition progresses, additional symptoms may include: Sudden, severe back pain, Lack of feeling in the legs, Difficulty urinating or moving your bowels, Headache, Stiff neck, Sensitivity to light.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you experience signs and symptoms of spinal arteriovenous malformation.
The specific cause isn't known. Most spinal AVMs are present at birth (congenital), but others may occur later in life.
There are no known risk factors for spinal arteriovenous malformation. The condition occurs equally in men and women.
Untreated, spinal arteriovenous malformation can lead to progressive disability by damaging the spinal cord and surrounding tissues. Specific complications may include: Problems with moving (motor deficits), Pain, tingling and numbness (sensory deficits), Spinal column deformity, Bulging blood vessel (aneurysm), High blood pressure in the veins (venous hypertension), which can cause fluid accumulation (edema) and tissue death due to lack of oxygen (spinal cord infarction), Hemorrhage, which can accelerate spinal cord damage.
Your ability to control your limbs after a spinal cord injury depends on two factors: the place of the injury along your spinal cord and the severity of injury to the spinal cord.
The lowest normal part of your spinal cord is referred to as the neurological level of your injury. The severity of the injury is often called "the completeness" and is classified as either of the following:
Complete. If all feeling (sensory) and all ability to control movement (motor function) are lost below the spinal cord injury, your injury is called complete.
Incomplete. If you have some motor or sensory function below the affected area, your injury is called incomplete. There are varying degrees of incomplete injury.
Additionally, paralysis from a spinal cord injury may be referred to as:
Tetraplegia. Also known as quadriplegia, this means that your arms, hands, trunk, legs and pelvic organs are all affected by your spinal cord injury.
Paraplegia. This paralysis affects all or part of the trunk, legs and pelvic organs.
Your health care team will perform a series of tests to determine the neurological level and completeness of your injury.
Spinal cord injuries of any kind may result in one or more of the following signs and symptoms: Loss of movement, Loss or altered sensation, including the ability to feel heat, cold and touch, Loss of bowel or bladder control, Exaggerated reflex activities or spasms, Changes in sexual function, sexual sensitivity and fertility, Pain or an intense stinging sensation caused by damage to the nerve fibers in your spinal cord, Difficulty breathing, coughing or clearing secretions from your lungs.
Emergency signs and symptoms of a spinal cord injury after an accident may include: Extreme back pain or pressure in your neck, head or back, Weakness, incoordination or paralysis in any part of your body, Numbness, tingling or loss of sensation in your hands, fingers, feet or toes, Loss of bladder or bowel control, Difficulty with balance and walking, Impaired breathing after injury, An oddly positioned or twisted neck or back.
Anyone who experiences significant trauma to his or her head or neck needs immediate medical evaluation for the possibility of a spinal injury. In fact, it's safest to assume that trauma victims have a spinal injury until proved otherwise because:
A serious spinal injury isn't always immediately obvious. If it isn't recognized, a more severe injury may occur.
Numbness or paralysis may occur immediately or come on gradually as bleeding or swelling occurs in or around the spinal cord.
The time between injury and treatment can be critical in determining the extent and severity of complications and the possible extent of expected recovery.
Don't move the injured person — permanent paralysis and other serious complications may result, Call 911 or your local emergency medical assistance number, Keep the person still, Place heavy towels on both sides of the neck or hold the head and neck to prevent them from moving until emergency care arrives, Provide basic first aid, such as stopping any bleeding and making the person comfortable, without moving the head or neck.
Spinal cord injuries may result from damage to the vertebrae, ligaments or disks of the spinal column or to the spinal cord itself.
A traumatic spinal cord injury may stem from a sudden, traumatic blow to your spine that fractures, dislocates, crushes or compresses one or more of your vertebrae. It may also result from a gunshot or knife wound that penetrates and cuts your spinal cord.
Additional damage usually occurs over days or weeks because of bleeding, swelling, inflammation and fluid accumulation in and around your spinal cord.
A nontraumatic spinal cord injury may be caused by arthritis, cancer, inflammation, infections or disk degeneration of the spine.
The central nervous system consists of the brain and spinal cord. The spinal cord, made of soft tissue and surrounded by bones (vertebrae), extends downward from the base of your brain and is made up of nerve cells and groups of nerves called tracts, which go to different parts of your body.
The lower end of your spinal cord stops a little above your waist in the region called the conus medullaris. Below this region is a group of nerve roots called the cauda equina.
Tracts in your spinal cord carry messages between your brain and the rest of your body. Motor tracts carry signals from your brain to control muscle movement. Sensory tracts carry signals from body parts to your brain relating to heat, cold, pressure, pain and the position of your limbs.
Whether the cause is traumatic or nontraumatic, the damage affects the nerve fibers passing through the injured area and may impair part or all of your corresponding muscles and nerves below the injury site.
A chest (thoracic) or lower back (lumbar) injury can affect your torso, legs, bowel and bladder control, and sexual function. A neck (cervical) injury affects the same areas in addition to affecting movements of your arms and, possibly, your ability to breathe.
The most common causes of spinal cord injuries in the United States are:
Motor vehicle accidents. Auto and motorcycle accidents are the leading cause of spinal cord injuries, accounting for almost half of new spinal cord injuries each year.
Falls. A spinal cord injury after age 65 is most often caused by a fall. Overall, falls cause about 31% of spinal cord injuries.
Acts of violence. Over 13% of spinal cord injuries result from violent encounters, most commonly involving gunshot wounds. Knife wounds also are common.
Sports and recreation injuries. Athletic activities, such as impact sports and diving in shallow water, cause about 10% of spinal cord injuries.
Alcohol. Alcohol use is a factor in about 1 out of every 4 spinal cord injuries.
Diseases. Cancer, arthritis, osteoporosis and inflammation of the spinal cord also can cause spinal cord injuries.
Although a spinal cord injury is usually the result of an accident and can happen to anyone, certain factors may predispose you to a higher risk of sustaining a spinal cord injury, including:
Being male. Spinal cord injuries affect a disproportionate number of men. In fact, females account for only about 20% of traumatic spinal cord injuries in the United States.
Being between the ages of 16 and 30. You're most likely to suffer a traumatic spinal cord injury if you're between the ages of 16 and 30. The average age at time of injury is 43 years.
Being older than 65. Falls cause most injuries in older adults.
Engaging in risky behavior. Diving into too-shallow water or playing sports without wearing the proper safety gear or taking proper precautions can lead to spinal cord injuries. Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of spinal cord injuries for people under 65.
Having a bone or joint disorder. A relatively minor injury can cause a spinal cord injury if you have another disorder that affects your bones or joints, such as arthritis or osteoporosis.
At first, changes in the way your body functions may be overwhelming. However, your rehabilitation team will help you develop the tools you need to address the changes caused by the spinal cord injury, in addition to recommending equipment and resources to promote quality of life and independence. Areas often affected include:
Bladder control. Your bladder will continue to store urine from your kidneys. However, your brain may not be able to control your bladder as well because the message carrier (the spinal cord) has been injured.
The changes in bladder control increase your risk of urinary tract infections. The changes may also cause kidney infections and kidney or bladder stones. During rehabilitation, you'll learn new techniques to help empty your bladder.
Bowel control. Although your stomach and intestines work much like they did before your injury, control of your bowel movements is often altered. A high-fiber diet may help regulate your bowels, and you'll learn techniques to optimize your bowel function during rehabilitation.
Skin sensation. Below the neurological level of your injury, you may have lost part of or all skin sensations. Therefore, your skin can't send a message to your brain when it's injured by certain things such as prolonged pressure, heat or cold.
This can make you more susceptible to pressure sores, but changing positions frequently — with help, if needed — can help prevent these sores. You'll learn proper skin care during rehabilitation, which can help you avoid these problems.
Circulatory control. A spinal cord injury may cause circulatory problems ranging from low blood pressure when you rise (orthostatic hypotension) to swelling of your extremities. These circulation changes may also increase your risk of developing blood clots, such as deep vein thrombosis or a pulmonary embolus.
Another problem with circulatory control is a potentially life-threatening rise in blood pressure (autonomic hyperreflexia). Your rehabilitation team will teach you how to address these problems if they affect you.
Respiratory system. Your injury may make it more difficult to breathe and cough if your abdominal and chest muscles are affected. These include the diaphragm and the muscles in your chest wall and abdomen.
Your neurological level of injury will determine what kind of breathing problems you may have. If you have a cervical and thoracic spinal cord injury, you may have an increased risk of pneumonia or other lung problems. Medications and therapy can help prevent and treat these problems.
Muscle tone. Some people with spinal cord injuries experience one of two types of muscle tone problems: uncontrolled tightening or motion in the muscles (spasticity) or soft and limp muscles lacking muscle tone (flaccidity).
Fitness and wellness. Weight loss and muscle atrophy are common soon after a spinal cord injury. Limited mobility may lead to a more sedentary lifestyle, placing you at risk of obesity, cardiovascular disease and diabetes.
A dietitian can help you eat a nutritious diet to sustain an adequate weight. Physical and occupational therapists can help you develop a fitness and exercise program.
Sexual health. Sexuality, fertility and sexual function may be affected by a spinal cord injury. Men may notice changes in erection and ejaculation; women may notice changes in lubrication. Physicians specializing in urology or fertility can offer options for sexual functioning and fertility.
Pain. Some people experience pain, such as muscle or joint pain, from overuse of particular muscle groups. Nerve pain can occur after a spinal cord injury, especially in someone with an incomplete injury.
Depression.Coping with all the changes a spinal cord injury brings and living with pain causes some people to experience depression.
Spinal cord tumors can cause different signs and symptoms, especially as tumors grow. The tumors may affect your spinal cord or the nerve roots, blood vessels or bones of your spine. Signs and symptoms may include: Pain at the site of the tumor due to tumor growth, Back pain, often radiating to other parts of your body, Feeling less sensitive to pain, heat and cold, Loss of bowel or bladder function, Difficulty walking, sometimes leading to falls, Back pain that's worse at night, Loss of sensation or muscle weakness, especially in your arms or legs, Muscle weakness , which may be mild or severe, in different parts of your body.
Back pain is a common early symptom of spinal tumors. Pain may also spread beyond your back to your hips, legs, feet or arms and may worsen over time — even with treatment.
Spinal tumors progress at different rates depending on the type of tumor.
There are many causes of back pain, and most back pain isn't caused by a tumor. But because early diagnosis and treatment are important for spinal tumors, see your doctor about your back pain if: It's persistent and progressive, It's not activity related, It gets worse at night, You have a history of cancer and develop new back pain, You have other symptoms of cancer, such as nausea, vomiting or dizziness.
Seek immediate medical attention if you experience: Progressive muscle weakness or numbness in your legs or arms, Changes in bowel or bladder function.
It's not clear why most spinal tumors develop. Experts suspect that defective genes play a role. But it's usually not known whether such genetic defects are inherited or simply develop over time. They might be caused by something in the environment, such as exposure to certain chemicals. In some cases, however, spinal cord tumors are linked to known inherited syndromes, such as neurofibromatosis 2 and von Hippel-Lindau disease.
Spinal cord tumors are more common in people who have:
Neurofibromatosis 2. In this hereditary disorder, benign tumors develop on or near the nerves related to hearing. This may lead to progressive hearing loss in one or both ears. Some people with neurofibromatosis 2 also develop spinal canal tumors.
Von Hippel-Lindau disease. This rare, multisystem disorder is associated with blood vessel tumors (hemangioblastomas) in the brain, retina and spinal cord and with other types of tumors in the kidneys or adrenal glands.
Spinal tumors can compress spinal nerves, leading to a loss of movement or sensation below the location of the tumor. This can sometimes cause changes in bowel and bladder function. Nerve damage may be permanent.
However, if caught early and treated aggressively, it may be possible to prevent further loss of function and regain nerve function. Depending on its location, a tumor that presses against the spinal cord itself may be life-threatening.
Spinal headache symptoms include: Dull, throbbing pain that varies in intensity from mild to incapacitating, Pain that typically gets worse when you sit up or stand and decreases or goes away when you lie down.
Spinal headaches are often accompanied by: Dizziness, Ringing in the ears (tinnitus), Hearing loss, Blurred or double vision, Sensitivity to light (photophobia), Nausea and vomiting, Neck pain or stiffness, Seizures.
Tell your doctor if you develop a headache after a spinal tap or spinal anesthesia — especially if the headache gets worse when you sit up or stand.
Spinal headaches are caused by leakage of spinal fluid through a puncture hole in the tough membrane (dura mater) that surrounds the spinal cord. This leakage decreases the pressure exerted by the spinal fluid on the brain and spinal cord, which leads to a headache.
Spinal headaches typically appear within 48 hours after a spinal tap or spinal anesthesia.
Sometimes epidural anesthesia may lead to a spinal headache as well. Although epidural anesthetic is injected just outside the membrane that surrounds the spinal cord, a spinal headache is possible if the membrane is unintentionally punctured.
Risk factors for spinal headaches include: Being between the ages of 18 and 30, Being female, Being pregnant, Having a history of chronic headaches, Undergoing procedures involving the use of larger needles or multiple punctures in the membrane that surrounds the spinal cord, Having a small body mass.
Many people have evidence of spinal stenosis on an MRI or CT scan but may not have symptoms. When they do occur, they often start gradually and worsen over time. Symptoms vary depending on the location of the stenosis and which nerves are affected. Numbness or tingling in a hand, arm, foot or leg, Weakness in a hand, arm, foot or leg, Problems with walking and balance, Neck pain, In severe cases, bowel or bladder dysfunction (urinary urgency and incontinence).
Numbness or tingling in a foot or leg, Weakness in a foot or leg, Pain or cramping in one or both legs when you stand for long periods of time or when you walk, which usually eases when you bend forward or sit, Back pain.
See your doctor if you have any of the symptoms listed.
The backbone (spine) runs from your neck to your lower back. The bones of your spine form a spinal canal, which protects your spinal cord (nerves).
Some people are born with a small spinal canal. But most spinal stenosis occurs when something happens to narrow the open space within the spine. Causes of spinal stenosis may include:
Overgrowth of bone. Wear and tear damage from osteoarthritis on your spinal bones can prompt the formation of bone spurs, which can grow into the spinal canal. Paget's disease, a bone disease that usually affects adults, also can cause bone overgrowth in the spine.
Herniated disks. The soft cushions that act as shock absorbers between your vertebrae tend to dry out with age. Cracks in a disk's exterior may allow some of the soft inner material to escape and press on the spinal cord or nerves.
Thickened ligaments. The tough cords that help hold the bones of your spine together can become stiff and thickened over time. These thickened ligaments can bulge into the spinal canal.
Tumors. Abnormal growths can form inside the spinal cord, within the membranes that cover the spinal cord or in the space between the spinal cord and vertebrae. These are uncommon and identifiable on spine imaging with an MRI or CT.
Spinal injuries. Car accidents and other trauma can cause dislocations or fractures of one or more vertebrae. Displaced bone from a spinal fracture may damage the contents of the spinal canal. Swelling of nearby tissue immediately after back surgery also can put pressure on the spinal cord or nerves.
Most people with spinal stenosis are over the age of 50. Though degenerative changes can cause spinal stenosis in younger people, other causes need to be considered. These include trauma, congenital spinal deformity such as scoliosis, and a genetic disease affecting bone and muscle development throughout the body. Spinal imaging can differentiate these causes.
Rarely, untreated severe spinal stenosis may progress and cause permanent: Numbness, Weakness, Balance problems, Incontinence, Paralysis.
Signs and symptoms of SCAD may include: Chest pain, A rapid heartbeat or fluttery feeling in your chest, Pain in your arms, shoulders or jaw, Shortness of breath, Sweating, Unusual, extreme tiredness, Nausea, Dizziness.
If you experience chest pain or think you might be having a heart attack, call 911 or your local emergency number. If you don't have access to emergency medical services, have someone drive you to the nearest hospital. Drive yourself only as a last resort.
It's not clear what causes SCAD. However, doctors and researchers have found some similarities among people who have had SCAD.
Risk factors for SCAD include:
Female sex. Though SCAD can occur in both men and women, it tends to affect women more than men.
Recent childbirth. Some women who have had SCAD have recently given birth. SCAD has been found to occur most often in the first few weeks after delivery.
Underlying blood vessel conditions. Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD), which causes irregular growth of cells in artery walls, is associated with SCAD. FMD can weaken artery walls, leading to blockages, dissections or aneurysms. It can also cause high blood pressure, stroke and tears in other blood vessels. Women are more likely to have FMD than men.
Diseases that cause inflammation of the blood vessels, such as lupus and polyarteritis nodosa, have also been associated with SCAD.
Arteries that are twisted (tortuous arteries) are more common among people who have had SCAD.
Inherited connective tissue diseases. Genetic diseases that cause problems with the body's connective tissues, such as vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and Marfan syndrome, have been found to occur in people who have had SCAD.
Very high blood pressure. Severe high blood pressure can be associated with SCAD.
Illegal drug use. Using cocaine or other illegal drugs may increase your risk of SCAD.
It's not clear whether extreme or intense physical exercise and severe emotional stress increase the risk of SCAD. Researchers have noted that there may be a connection, but more research is needed.
SCAD is a tear inside an artery that carries blood to the heart. When the inner layers of the artery separate from the outer layers, blood can pool in the area between the layers. The pressure of the pooling blood can make a short tear much longer. Blood trapped between the layers can form a blood clot (hematoma).
SCAD may slow blood flow through the artery, which makes the heart muscle weaken. Or blood flow through the artery may be completely stopped, causing heart muscle to die (heart attack). A heart attack that occurs in SCAD is different from a heart attack caused by hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis).
SCAD can happen more than once, despite successful treatment. It may recur soon after the initial episode or years later. People who have SCAD may also have a higher risk of other heart problems, such as heart failure due to the damage to the heart muscle from heart attacks.
Doctors are studying why SCAD recurs and who is most likely to experience a recurrence.
Signs and symptoms of a sprained ankle vary depending on the severity of the injury. They may include: Pain, especially when you bear weight on the affected foot, Tenderness when you touch the ankle, Swelling, Bruising, Restricted range of motion, Instability in the ankle, Popping sensation or sound at the time of injury.
Call your doctor if you have pain and swelling in your ankle and you suspect a sprain. Self-care measures may be all you need, but talk to your doctor to discuss whether you should have your ankle evaluated. If signs and symptoms are severe, you may have significant damage to a ligament or a broken bone in your ankle or lower leg.
A sprain occurs when your ankle is forced to move out of its normal position, which can cause one or more of the ankle's ligaments to stretch, partially tear or tear completely.
Causes of a sprained ankle might include: A fall that causes your ankle to twist, Landing awkwardly on your foot after jumping or pivoting, Walking or exercising on an uneven surface, Another person stepping or landing on your foot during a sports activity.
Factors that increase your risk of a sprained ankle include:
Sports participation. Ankle sprains are a common sports injury, particularly in sports that require jumping, cutting action, or rolling or twisting of the foot such as basketball, tennis, football, soccer and trail running.
Uneven surfaces. Walking or running on uneven surfaces or poor field conditions may increase the risk of an ankle sprain.
Prior ankle injury. Once you've sprained your ankle or had another type of ankle injury, you're more likely to sprain it again.
Poor physical condition. Poor strength or flexibility in the ankles may increase the risk of a sprain when participating in sports.
Improper shoes. Shoes that don't fit properly or aren't appropriate for an activity, as well as high-heeled shoes in general, make ankles more vulnerable to injury.
Failing to treat a sprained ankle properly, engaging in activities too soon after spraining your ankle or spraining your ankle repeatedly might lead to the following complications: Chronic ankle pain, Chronic ankle joint instability, Arthritis in the ankle joint.
Signs and symptoms will vary, depending on the severity of the injury, and may include: Pain, Swelling, Bruising, Limited ability to move the affected joint, Hearing or feeling a "pop" in your joint at the time of injury.
Mild sprains can be treated at home. But the injuries that cause sprains can also cause serious injuries, such as fractures. You should see a doctor if you: Can't move or bear weight on the affected joint, Have pain directly over the bones of an injured joint, Have numbness in any part of the injured area.
A sprain occurs when you overextend or tear a ligament while severely stressing a joint. Sprains often occur in the following circumstances: Ankle — Walking or exercising on an uneven surface, landing awkwardly from a jump, Knee — Pivoting during an athletic activity, Wrist — Landing on an outstretched hand during a fall, Thumb — Skiing injury or overextension when playing racquet sports, such as tennis.
Children have areas of softer tissue, called growth plates, near the ends of their bones. The ligaments around a joint are often stronger than these growth plates, so children are more likely to experience a fracture than a sprain.
Factors contributing to sprains include:
Environmental conditions. Slippery or uneven surfaces can make you more prone to injury.
Fatigue. Tired muscles are less likely to provide good support for your joints. When you're tired, you're also more likely to succumb to forces that could stress a joint.
Poor equipment. Ill-fitting or poorly maintained footwear or other sporting equipment can contribute to your risk of a sprain.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin most often occurs on sun-exposed skin, such as your scalp, the backs of your hands, your ears or your lips. But it can occur anywhere on your body, including inside your mouth, the bottoms of your feet and on your genitals.
Signs and symptoms of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin include: A firm, red nodule, A flat sore with a scaly crust, A new sore or raised area on an old scar or ulcer, A rough, scaly patch on your lip that may evolve to an open sore, A red sore or rough patch inside your mouth, A red, raised patch or wartlike sore on or in the anus or on your genitals.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have a sore or scab that doesn't heal in about two months or a flat patch of scaly skin that won't go away.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin occurs when the flat, thin squamous cells in the middle and outer layers of your skin develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The mutations tell the squamous cells to grow out of control and to continue living when normal cells would die.
Most of the DNA mutations in skin cells are caused by ultraviolet (UV) radiation found in sunlight and in commercial tanning lamps and tanning beds.
But sun exposure doesn't explain skin cancers that develop on skin not ordinarily exposed to sunlight. This indicates that other factors may contribute to your risk of skin cancer, such as having a condition that weakens your immune system.
Factors that may increase your risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin include:
Fair skin. Anyone, regardless of skin color, can get squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. However, having less pigment (melanin) in your skin provides less protection from damaging UV radiation.
If you have blond or red hair and light-colored eyes and you freckle or sunburn easily, you're much more likely to develop skin cancer, including squamous cell carcinoma, than is a person with darker skin.
Excessive sun exposure. Being exposed to UV light from the sun increases your risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Spending lots of time in the sun — particularly if you don't cover your skin with clothing or sunblock — increases your risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin even more.
Use of tanning beds. People who use indoor tanning beds have an increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin.
A history of sunburns. Having had one or more blistering sunburns as a child or teenager increases your risk of developing squamous cell carcinoma of the skin as an adult. Sunburns in adulthood also are a risk factor.
A personal history of precancerous skin lesions. Having a precancerous skin lesion, such as actinic keratosis or Bowen's disease, increases your risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin.
A personal history of skin cancer. If you've had squamous cell carcinoma of the skin once, you're much more likely to develop it again.
Weakened immune system. People with weakened immune systems have an increased risk of skin cancer. This includes people who have leukemia or lymphoma and those who take medications that suppress the immune system, such as those who have undergone organ transplants.
Rare genetic disorder. People with xeroderma pigmentosum, which causes an extreme sensitivity to sunlight, have a greatly increased risk of developing skin cancer.
Untreated squamous cell carcinoma of the skin can destroy nearby healthy tissue, spread to the lymph nodes or other organs, and may be fatal, although this is uncommon.
The risk of aggressive squamous cell carcinoma of the skin may be increased in cases where the cancer: Is particularly large or deep, Involves the mucous membranes, such as the lips, Occurs in a person with a weakened immune system, such as someone who takes anti-rejection medications after an organ transplant or someone who has chronic leukemia.
Signs and symptoms of stage 4 prostate cancer may include: Painful urination, Decreased force in the stream of urine, Blood in the semen, Bone pain, Swelling in the legs, Fatigue.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
Doctors aren't certain what causes stage 4 prostate cancer.
Stage 4 prostate cancer occurs when prostate cancer cells break away from the prostate and spread to the lymph nodes or to other areas of the body.
Prostate cancer cells that spread beyond the prostate most often travel to the: Lymph nodes, Bones, Liver.
Factors that may increase your risk of stage 4 prostate cancer include:
A family history of prostate cancer. Men with certain inherited gene mutations that increase the risk of prostate cancer have an increased risk of more-aggressive prostate cancers.
African-American race. Black men have an increased risk of aggressive prostate cancer.
Staph infections can range from minor skin problems to endocarditis, a life-threatening infection of the inner lining of your heart (endocardium). Because of this, signs and symptoms of staph infections vary widely, depending on the location and severity of the infection.
Skin infections caused by staph bacteria include:
Boils. The most common type of staph infection is the boil, a pocket of pus that develops in a hair follicle or oil gland. The skin over the infected area usually becomes red and swollen.
If a boil breaks open, it will probably drain pus. Boils occur most often under the arms or around the groin or buttocks.
Impetigo. This contagious, often painful rash can be caused by staph bacteria. Impetigo usually features large blisters that may ooze fluid and develop a honey-colored crust.
Cellulitis. Cellulitis — an infection of the deeper layers of skin — causes skin redness and swelling on the surface of your skin. Sores or areas of oozing discharge may develop, too.
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. Toxins produced as a result of a staph infection may lead to staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. Affecting mostly babies and children, this condition features a fever, a rash and sometimes blisters. When the blisters break, the top layer of skin comes off — leaving a red, raw surface that looks like a burn.
Staph bacteria are one of the most common causes of food poisoning. Symptoms come on quickly, usually within hours of eating a contaminated food. Symptoms usually disappear quickly, too, often lasting just half a day.
A staph infection in food usually doesn't cause a fever. Signs and symptoms you can expect with this type of staph infection include: Nausea and vomiting, Diarrhea, Dehydration, Low blood pressure.
Also known as a bloodstream infection, bacteremia occurs when staph bacteria enter a person's bloodstream. A fever and low blood pressure are signs of bacteremia. The bacteria can travel to locations deep within your body, to produce infections affecting: Internal organs, such as your brain, heart or lungs, Bones and muscles, Surgically implanted devices, such as artificial joints or cardiac pacemakers.
This life-threatening condition results from toxins produced by some strains of staph bacteria and has been linked to certain types of tampons, skin wounds and surgery. It usually develops suddenly with: A high fever, Nausea and vomiting, A rash on your palms and soles that resembles a sunburn, Confusion, Muscle aches, Diarrhea, Stomach pain.
Septic arthritis is often caused by a staph infection. The bacteria often target the knees, shoulders, hips, and fingers or toes. Signs and symptoms may include: Joint swelling, Severe pain in the affected joint, Fever.
Go to the doctor if you or your child has: An area of red, irritated or painful skin, Pus-filled blisters, Fever.
You may also want to consult your doctor if: Skin infections are being passed from one family member to another, Two or more family members have skin infections at the same time.
Many people carry staph bacteria and never develop staph infections. However, if you develop a staph infection, there's a good chance that it's from bacteria you've been carrying around for some time.
These bacteria can also be transmitted from person to person. Because staph bacteria are so hardy, they can live on objects such as pillowcases or towels long enough to transfer to the next person who touches them.
Staph bacteria are able to survive: Drying, Extremes of temperature, Stomach acid.
A variety of factors — including the status of your immune system to the types of sports you play — can increase your risk of developing staph infections.
Certain disorders or the medications used to treat them can make you more susceptible to staph infections. People who may be more likely to get a staph infection include those with: Diabetes who use insulin, HIV/AIDS, Kidney failure requiring dialysis, Weakened immune systems — either from a disease or medications that suppress the immune system, A transplant, Cancer, especially those who are undergoing chemotherapy or radiation, Skin damage from conditions such as eczema, insect bites or minor trauma that opens the skin, Respiratory illness, such as cystic fibrosis or emphysema.
Despite vigorous attempts to eradicate them, staph bacteria remain present in hospitals, where they attack the most vulnerable, including people with: Weakened immune systems, Burns, Surgical wounds.
Staph bacteria can travel along the medical tubing that connects the outside world with your internal organs. Examples include: Dialysis tubing, Urinary catheters, Feeding tubes, Breathing tubes, Intravascular catheters.
Staph bacteria can spread easily through cuts, abrasions and skin-to-skin contact. Staph infections may also spread in the locker room through shared razors, towels, uniforms or equipment.
Food handlers who don't properly wash their hands can transfer staph from their skin to the food they're preparing. Foods that are contaminated with staph look and taste normal.
If staph bacteria invade your bloodstream, you may develop a type of infection that affects your entire body. Called sepsis, this infection can lead to septic shock — a life-threatening episode with extremely low blood pressure.
One to three days before a rash develops, you may show early signs of Stevens-Johnson syndrome, including: Fever, A sore mouth and throat, Fatigue, Burning eyes.
As the condition develops, other signs and symptoms include: Unexplained widespread skin pain, A red or purplish rash that spreads, Blisters on your skin and the mucous membranes of the mouth, nose, eyes and genitals, Shedding of skin within days after blisters form.
Stevens-Johnson syndrome requires immediate medical attention. Seek emergency medical care if you experience signs and symptoms of this condition. Drug-induced reactions may occur during the use of a medication or up to two weeks after discontinuing it.
Stevens-Johnson syndrome is a rare and unpredictable illness. Your doctor may not be able to identify its exact cause, but usually the condition is triggered by medication, an infection or both. You may react to medication while you're using it or up to two weeks after you've stopped using it.
Drugs that can cause Stevens-Johnson syndrome include: Anti-gout medications, such as allopurinol, Medications to treat seizures and mental illness (anticonvulsants and antipsychotics), Antibacterial sulfonamides (including sulfasalazine), Nevirapine (Viramune, Viramune XR), Pain relievers, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve).
Infections that can cause Stevens-Johnson syndrome include pneumonia and HIV.
Factors that increase your risk of developing Stevens-Johnson syndrome include:
An HIV infection. Among people with HIV, the incidence of Stevens-Johnson syndrome is about 100 times greater than among the general population.
A weakened immune system. The immune system can be affected by an organ transplant, HIV/AIDS and autoimmune diseases.
Cancer. People with cancer, particularly blood cancer, are at increased risk of Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
A history of Stevens-Johnson syndrome. If you've had a medication-related form of this condition, you are at risk of a recurrence if you use that drug again.
A family history of Stevens-Johnson syndrome. If an immediate family member has had Stevens-Johnson syndrome, you may be more susceptible to developing it too.
Genetic factors. Having certain genetic variations puts you at increased risk of Stevens-Johnson syndrome, especially if you're also taking drugs for seizures, gout or mental illness.
Stevens-Johnson syndrome complications include:
Dehydration. Areas where the skin has shed lose fluids. And sores in the mouth and throat can make fluid intake difficult, resulting in dehydration.
Blood infection (sepsis). Sepsis occurs when bacteria from an infection enter your bloodstream and spread throughout your body. Sepsis is a rapidly progressing, life-threatening condition that can cause shock and organ failure.
Eye problems. The rash caused by Stevens-Johnson syndrome can lead to eye inflammation, dry eye and light sensitivity. In severe cases, it can lead to visual impairment and, rarely, blindness.
Lung involvement. The condition may lead to acute respiratory failure.
Permanent skin damage. When your skin grows back following Stevens-Johnson syndrome, it may have abnormal bumps and coloring. And you may have scars. Lasting skin problems may cause your hair to fall out, and your fingernails and toenails may not grow normally.
The signs and symptoms of Stickler syndrome — and the severity of those signs and symptoms — can vary widely from person to person, even within the same family.
Eye problems. In addition to having severe nearsightedness, children who have Stickler syndrome often experience cataracts, glaucoma and retinal detachments.
Hearing difficulties. The extent of hearing loss varies among people who have Stickler syndrome. It usually affects the ability to hear high frequencies.
Bone and joint abnormalities. Children who have Stickler syndrome often have overly flexible joints and are more likely to develop abnormal curvatures of the spine, such as scoliosis. Osteoarthritis can begin in adolescence.
Regular follow-up visits, as well as yearly visits to doctors specializing in eye disorders, are crucial to monitor any progression of symptoms. Early treatment can help prevent life-altering complications. Hearing should be checked every six months in children through age 5 and then yearly thereafter.
Stickler syndrome is caused by mutations in certain genes involved in the formation of collagen — one of the building blocks of many types of connective tissues. The type of collagen most commonly affected is that used to produce joint cartilage and the jellylike material (vitreous) found within the eyes.
Your child is more likely to be born with Stickler syndrome if either you or your partner has the disorder.
Potential complications of Stickler syndrome include:
Difficulty breathing or feeding. Breathing or feeding difficulties may occur in babies born with an opening in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), a small lower jaw and a tendency for the tongue to drop back toward the throat.
Blindness. Blindness can occur if retinal detachments aren't repaired promptly.
Ear infections. Children with facial structure abnormalities associated with Stickler syndrome are more likely to develop ear infections than are children with normal facial structure.
Deafness. Hearing loss associated with Sticker syndrome may worsen with time.
Heart problems. Some people with Stickler syndrome may be at higher risk of heart valve problems.
Dental problems. Most children who have Stickler syndrome have abnormally small jaws, so there often isn't enough room for the full complement of adult teeth. Braces or, in some cases, dental surgeries may be necessary.
Signs and symptoms of stomach cancer may include: Difficulty swallowing, Feeling bloated after eating, Feeling full after eating small amounts of food, Heartburn, Indigestion, Nausea, Stomach pain, Unintentional weight loss, Vomiting.
If you have signs and symptoms that worry you, make an appointment with your doctor. Your doctor will likely investigate more-common causes of these signs and symptoms first.
It's not clear what causes stomach cancer, though research has identified many factors that can increase the risk.
Doctors know that stomach cancer begins when a cell in the stomach develops changes in its DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the cell to grow quickly and to continue living when healthy cells would die. The accumulating cells form a tumor that can invade and destroy healthy tissue. With time, cells can break off and spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body.
Factors that increase the risk of stomach cancer include: Gastroesophageal reflux disease, Obesity, A diet high in salty and smoked foods, A diet low in fruits and vegetables, Family history of stomach cancer, Infection with Helicobacter pylori, Long-term stomach inflammation (gastritis), Smoking, Stomach polyps.
Stomach polyps usually don't cause signs or symptoms.
But as a stomach polyp enlarges, open sores (ulcers) can develop on its surface. Rarely, the polyp can block the opening between your stomach and your small intestine.
Signs and symptoms of stomach polyps include: Pain or tenderness when you press your abdomen, Nausea, Blood in your stool, Anemia.
See your doctor if you have persistent blood in your stool or other signs or symptoms of stomach polyps.
Stomach polyps form in response to damage to your stomach lining. The most common causes of stomach polyps are:
Chronic stomach inflammation. Also known as gastritis, this condition can cause the formation of hyperplastic polyps and adenomas. Hyperplastic polyps are unlikely to become cancerous, although those larger than about 2/5 inch (1 centimeter) carry a greater risk. Adenomas are the least common type of stomach polyp but the type most likely to become cancerous. For that reason, they are generally removed.
Familial adenomatous polyposis. This rare, inherited syndrome causes certain cells on the stomach's inner lining to a specific type of polyps called fundic gland polyps. When associated with this syndrome, fundic gland polyps are removed because they can become cancerous. Familial adenomatous polyposis can also cause adenomas.
Regular use of certain stomach medications. Fundic gland polyps are common among people who regularly take proton pump inhibitors to reduce stomach acid. These polyps are generally small and aren't a cause for concern. Fundic gland polyps with a diameter larger than about 2/5 inch (1 centimeter) carry a small risk of cancer, so your doctor might recommend discontinuing proton pump inhibitors or removing the polyp or both.
Factors that increase your chances of developing stomach polyps include:
Age. Stomach polyps are more common among people in midadulthood to late adulthood.
Bacterial stomach infection. Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) bacteria are a common cause of the gastritis that contributes to hyperplastic polyps and adenomas.
Familial adenomatous polyposis. This rare, inherited syndrome increases the risk of colon cancer and other conditions, including stomach polyps.
Certain medications. Long-term use of proton pump inhibitors, which are medications used to treat gastroesophageal reflux disease, has been linked to fundic gland polyps.
Signs and symptoms of strep throat can include: Throat pain that usually comes on quickly, Painful swallowing, Red and swollen tonsils, sometimes with white patches or streaks of pus, Tiny red spots on the area at the back of the roof of the mouth (soft or hard palate), Swollen, tender lymph nodes in your neck, Fever, Headache, Rash, Nausea or vomiting, especially in younger children, Body aches.
It's possible for you or your child to have many of these signs and symptoms but not have strep throat. The cause of these signs and symptoms could be a viral infection or some other illness. That's why your doctor generally tests specifically for strep throat.
It's also possible for you to be exposed to a person who carries strep but shows no symptoms.
Call your doctor if you or your child has any of these signs and symptoms: A sore throat accompanied by tender, swollen lymph glands, A sore throat that lasts longer than 48 hours, A fever, A sore throat accompanied by a rash, Problems breathing or swallowing, If strep has been diagnosed, a lack of improvement after taking antibiotics for 48 hours.
The cause of strep throat is bacteria known as Streptococcus pyogenes, also known as group A streptococcus.
Streptococcal bacteria are highly contagious. They can spread through airborne droplets when someone with the infection coughs or sneezes, or through shared food or drinks. You can also pick up the bacteria from a doorknob or other surface and transfer them to your nose, mouth or eyes.
Several factors can increase your risk of strep throat infection:
Young age. Strep throat occurs most commonly in children.
Time of year. Although strep throat can occur anytime, it tends to circulate in winter and early spring. Strep bacteria flourish wherever groups of people are in close contact.
Although strep throat isn't dangerous, it can lead to serious complications. Antibiotic treatment reduces the risk.
Strep bacteria may spread, causing infection in: Tonsils, Sinuses, Skin, Blood, Middle ear.
Strep infection may lead to inflammatory illnesses, including: Scarlet fever, a streptococcal infection characterized by a prominent rash, Inflammation of the kidney (poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis), Rheumatic fever, a serious inflammatory condition that can affect the heart, joints, nervous system and skin, Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis, a condition that causes inflammation of the joints.
A possible relationship has been suggested between strep infection and a rare condition called pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with group A streptococci (PANDAS). PANDAS is a term used to describe certain children whose symptoms of neuropsychiatric conditions, such as obsessive-compulsive disorder or tic disorders, are worsened by strep infection. This relationship currently remains unproved and controversial.
At first, you might barely notice the pain associated with a stress fracture, but it tends to worsen with time. The tenderness usually starts at a specific spot and decreases during rest. You might have swelling around the painful area.
Contact your doctor if your pain becomes severe or if you feel pain even when resting or at night.
Stress fractures often result from increasing the amount or intensity of an activity too quickly.
Bone adapts gradually to increased loads through remodeling, a normal process that speeds up when the load on the bone increases. During remodeling, bone tissue is destroyed (resorption), then rebuilt.
Bones subjected to unaccustomed force without enough time for recovery resorb cells faster than your body can replace them, which makes you more susceptible to stress fractures.
Factors that can increase your risk of stress fractures include:
Certain sports. Stress fractures are more common in people who engage in high-impact sports, such as track and field, basketball, tennis, dance or gymnastics.
Increased activity. Stress fractures often occur in people who suddenly shift from a sedentary lifestyle to an active training regimen or who rapidly increase the intensity, duration or frequency of training sessions.
Sex. Women, especially those who have abnormal or absent menstrual periods, are at higher risk of developing stress fractures.
Foot problems. People who have flat feet or high, rigid arches are more likely to develop stress fractures. Worn footwear contributes to the problem.
Weakened bones. Conditions such as osteoporosis can weaken your bones and make it easier for stress fractures to occur.
Previous stress fractures. Having had one or more stress fractures puts you at higher risk of having more.
Lack of nutrients. Eating disorders and lack of vitamin D and calcium can make bones more likely to develop stress fractures.
Some stress fractures don't heal properly, which can cause chronic problems. If underlying causes are not taken care of, you may be at higher risk of additional stress fractures.
If you have stress incontinence, you may leak urine when you: Cough or sneeze, Laugh, Bend over, Lift something heavy, Exercise, Have sex.
You may not experience incontinence every time you do one of these things, but any activity that increases pressure on your bladder can make you more vulnerable to unintentional urine loss, particularly when your bladder is full.
Talk to your doctor if your symptoms are bothersome or interfere with daily activities, such as your work, hobbies and social life.
Stress incontinence occurs when the muscles and other tissues that support the urethra (pelvic floor muscles) and the muscles that control the release of urine (urinary sphincter) weaken.
The bladder expands as it fills with urine. Normally, valve-like muscles in the urethra — the short tube that carries urine out of your body — stay closed as the bladder expands, preventing urine leakage until you reach a bathroom. But when those muscles weaken, anything that exerts force on the abdominal and pelvic muscles — sneezing, bending over, lifting or laughing hard, for instance — can put pressure on your bladder and cause urine leakage.
Your pelvic floor muscles and urinary sphincter may lose strength because of:
Childbirth. In women, tissue or nerve damage during delivery of a child can weaken the pelvic floor muscles or the sphincter. Stress incontinence from this damage may begin soon after delivery or occur years later.
Prostate surgery. In men, the surgical removal of the prostate gland to treat prostate cancer (prostatectomy) is the most common factor leading to stress incontinence. This procedure can weaken the sphincter, which lies directly below the prostate gland and encircles the urethra.
Other factors that may worsen stress incontinence include: Illnesses that cause chronic coughing, Obesity, Smoking, which can cause frequent coughing, High-impact activities, such as running and jumping, over many years.
Factors that increase the risk of developing stress incontinence include:
Age. Physical changes that occur as you age, such as the weakening of muscles, may make you more likely to develop stress incontinence. However, occasional stress incontinence can occur at any age.
Type of childbirth delivery. Women who've had a vaginal delivery are more likely to develop urinary incontinence than women who've delivered via a cesarean section. Women who've had a forceps delivery to more rapidly deliver a healthy baby may also have a greater risk of stress incontinence. Women who've had a vacuum-assisted delivery don't appear to have a higher risk for stress incontinence.
Body weight. People who are overweight or obese have a higher risk of stress incontinence. Excess weight increases pressure on the abdominal and pelvic organs.
Previous pelvic surgery. Hysterectomy in women and surgery for prostate cancer in men can weaken the muscles that support the bladder and urethra, increasing the risk of stress incontinence.
Complications of stress incontinence may include:
Emotional distress. If you experience stress incontinence with your daily activities, you may feel embarrassed and distressed by the condition. It can disrupt your work, social activities, relationships and even your sex life. Some people are embarrassed that they need pads or incontinence garments.
Mixed urinary incontinence. Mixed incontinence is common and means that you have both stress incontinence and urgency incontinence — the unintentional loss of urine resulting from bladder muscle contractions (overactive bladder) that cause an urgent need to urinate.
Skin rash or irritation. Skin that is constantly in contact with urine may get irritated or sore and can break down. This happens with severe incontinence if you don't take precautions, such as using moisture barriers or incontinence pads.
Stretch marks don't all look alike. They vary depending on how long you've had them, what caused them, where they are on your body, and the type of skin you have. Common variations include: Indented streaks or lines in the skin, Pink, red, black, blue or purple streaks, Bright streaks that fade to a lighter color, Streaks on the abdomen, breasts, hips, buttocks or thighs, Streaks covering large areas of the body.
See your doctor if you're concerned about the appearance of your skin or if the stretch marks cover large areas of your body. Your doctor can help determine the cause of the stretch marks and discuss treatment options.
Stretch marks seem to be caused by a stretching of the skin. Their severity is affected by several factors, including your genetic tendency, degree of stress on the skin and cortisone level. Cortisone — a hormone produced by the adrenal glands — weakens elastic fibers in the skin.
Anyone can develop stretch marks, but some factors increase your likelihood of getting them, including: Being female, Having a personal or family history of stretch marks, Being pregnant, especially for younger women, Being overweight or obese, Rapidly gaining or losing weight, Using corticosteroid medication, Undergoing breast enlargement surgery, Having Cushing's syndrome, Marfan syndrome or certain other genetic disorders.
If you or someone you're with may be having a stroke, pay particular attention to the time the symptoms began. Some treatment options are most effective when given soon after a stroke begins.
Signs and symptoms of stroke include:
Trouble speaking and understanding what others are saying. You may experience confusion, slur your words or have difficulty understanding speech.
Paralysis or numbness of the face, arm or leg. You may develop sudden numbness, weakness or paralysis in your face, arm or leg. This often affects just one side of your body. Try to raise both your arms over your head at the same time. If one arm begins to fall, you may be having a stroke. Also, one side of your mouth may droop when you try to smile.
Problems seeing in one or both eyes. You may suddenly have blurred or blackened vision in one or both eyes, or you may see double.
Headache. A sudden, severe headache, which may be accompanied by vomiting, dizziness or altered consciousness, may indicate that you're having a stroke.
Trouble walking. You may stumble or lose your balance. You may also have sudden dizziness or a loss of coordination.
Seek immediate medical attention if you notice any signs or symptoms of a stroke, even if they seem to come and go or they disappear completely. Think "FAST" and do the following: Face. Ask the person to smile. Does one side of the face droop?, Arms. Ask the person to raise both arms. Does one arm drift downward? Or is one arm unable to rise?, Speech. Ask the person to repeat a simple phrase. Is his or her speech slurred or strange?, Time. If you observe any of these signs, call 911 or emergency medical help immediately..
Call 911 or your local emergency number right away. Don't wait to see if symptoms stop. Every minute counts. The longer a stroke goes untreated, the greater the potential for brain damage and disability.
If you're with someone you suspect is having a stroke, watch the person carefully while waiting for emergency assistance.
There are two main causes of stroke: a blocked artery (ischemic stroke) or leaking or bursting of a blood vessel (hemorrhagic stroke). Some people may have only a temporary disruption of blood flow to the brain, known as a transient ischemic attack (TIA), that doesn't cause lasting symptoms.
This is the most common type of stroke. It happens when the brain's blood vessels become narrowed or blocked, causing severely reduced blood flow (ischemia). Blocked or narrowed blood vessels are caused by fatty deposits that build up in blood vessels or by blood clots or other debris that travel through your bloodstream and lodge in the blood vessels in your brain.
Some initial research shows that COVID-19 infection may be a possible cause of ischemic stroke, but more study is needed.
Hemorrhagic stroke occurs when a blood vessel in your brain leaks or ruptures. Brain hemorrhages can result from many conditions that affect your blood vessels. Factors related to hemorrhagic stroke include: Uncontrolled high blood pressure, Overtreatment with blood thinners (anticoagulants), Bulges at weak spots in your blood vessel walls (aneurysms), Trauma (such as a car accident), Protein deposits in blood vessel walls that lead to weakness in the vessel wall (cerebral amyloid angiopathy), Ischemic stroke leading to hemorrhage.
A less common cause of bleeding in the brain is the rupture of an abnormal tangle of thin-walled blood vessels (arteriovenous malformation).
A transient ischemic attack (TIA) — sometimes known as a ministroke — is a temporary period of symptoms similar to those you'd have in a stroke. A TIA doesn't cause permanent damage. They're caused by a temporary decrease in blood supply to part of your brain, which may last as little as five minutes.
Like an ischemic stroke, a TIA occurs when a clot or debris reduces or blocks blood flow to part of your nervous system.
Seek emergency care even if you think you've had a TIA because your symptoms got better. It's not possible to tell if you're having a stroke or TIA based only on your symptoms. If you've had a TIA, it means you may have a partially blocked or narrowed artery leading to your brain. Having a TIA increases your risk of having a full-blown stroke later.
Many factors can increase your stroke risk. Potentially treatable stroke risk factors include: Being overweight or obese, Physical inactivity, Heavy or binge drinking, Use of illegal drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamine.
High blood pressure, Cigarette smoking or secondhand smoke exposure, High cholesterol, Diabetes, Obstructive sleep apnea, Cardiovascular disease, including heart failure, heart defects, heart infection or abnormal heart rhythm, such as atrial fibrillation, Personal or family history of stroke, heart attack or transient ischemic attack, COVID-19 infection.
Other factors associated with a higher risk of stroke include:
Age — People age 55 or older have a higher risk of stroke than do younger people.
Race — African Americans have a higher risk of stroke than do people of other races.
Sex — Men have a higher risk of stroke than women. Women are usually older when they have strokes, and they're more likely to die of strokes than are men.
Hormones — Use of birth control pills or hormone therapies that include estrogen increases risk.
A stroke can sometimes cause temporary or permanent disabilities, depending on how long the brain lacks blood flow and which part was affected. Complications may include:
Paralysis or loss of muscle movement. You may become paralyzed on one side of your body, or lose control of certain muscles, such as those on one side of your face or one arm.
Difficulty talking or swallowing. A stroke might affect control of the muscles in your mouth and throat, making it difficult for you to talk clearly, swallow or eat. You also may have difficulty with language, including speaking or understanding speech, reading, or writing.
Memory loss or thinking difficulties. Many people who have had strokes experience some memory loss. Others may have difficulty thinking, reasoning, making judgments and understanding concepts.
Emotional problems. People who have had strokes may have more difficulty controlling their emotions, or they may develop depression.
Pain. Pain, numbness or other unusual sensations may occur in the parts of the body affected by stroke. For example, if a stroke causes you to lose feeling in your left arm, you may develop an uncomfortable tingling sensation in that arm.
Changes in behavior and self-care ability. People who have had strokes may become more withdrawn. They may need help with grooming and daily chores.
Stuttering signs and symptoms may include: Difficulty starting a word, phrase or sentence, Prolonging a word or sounds within a word, Repetition of a sound, syllable or word, Brief silence for certain syllables or words, or pauses within a word (broken word), Addition of extra words such as "um" if difficulty moving to the next word is anticipated, Excess tension, tightness, or movement of the face or upper body to produce a word, Anxiety about talking, Limited ability to effectively communicate.
The speech difficulties of stuttering may be accompanied by: Rapid eye blinks, Tremors of the lips or jaw, Facial tics, Head jerks, Clenching fists.
Stuttering may be worse when the person is excited, tired or under stress, or when feeling self-conscious, hurried or pressured. Situations such as speaking in front of a group or talking on the phone can be particularly difficult for people who stutter.
However, most people who stutter can speak without stuttering when they talk to themselves and when they sing or speak in unison with someone else.
It's common for children between the ages of 2 and 5 years to go through periods when they may stutter. For most children, this is part of learning to speak, and it gets better on its own. However, stuttering that persists may require treatment to improve speech fluency.
Call your doctor for a referral or contact a speech-language pathologist directly for an appointment if stuttering: Lasts more than six months, Occurs with other speech or language problems, Becomes more frequent or continues as the child grows older, Occurs with muscle tightening or visibly struggling to speak, Affects the ability to effectively communicate at school, at work or in social interactions, Causes anxiety or emotional problems, such as fear or avoidance of situations where speaking is required, Begins as an adult.
Researchers continue to study the underlying causes of developmental stuttering. A combination of factors may be involved. Possible causes of developmental stuttering include:
Abnormalities in speech motor control. Some evidence indicates that abnormalities in speech motor control, such as timing, sensory and motor coordination, may be involved.
Genetics. Stuttering tends to run in families. It appears that stuttering can result from inherited (genetic) abnormalities.
Speech fluency can be disrupted from causes other than developmental stuttering. A stroke, traumatic brain injury, or other brain disorders can cause speech that is slow or has pauses or repeated sounds (neurogenic stuttering).
Speech fluency can also be disrupted in the context of emotional distress. Speakers who do not stutter may experience dysfluency when they are nervous or feeling pressured. These situations may also cause speakers who stutter to be less fluent.
Speech difficulties that appear after an emotional trauma (psychogenic stuttering) are uncommon and not the same as developmental stuttering.
Males are much more likely to stutter than females are. Factors that increase the risk of stuttering include:
Delayed childhood development. Children who have developmental delays or other speech problems may be more likely to stutter.
Having relatives who stutter. Stuttering tends to run in families.
Stress. Stress in the family, high parental expectations or other types of pressure can worsen existing stuttering.
Stuttering can lead to: Problems communicating with others, Being anxious about speaking, Not speaking or avoiding situations that require speaking, Loss of social, school, or work participation and success, Being bullied or teased, Low self-esteem.
Signs and symptoms of a sty include: A red lump on your eyelid that is similar to a boil or a pimple, Eyelid pain, Eyelid swelling, Tearing.
Another condition that causes inflammation of the eyelid is a chalazion. A chalazion occurs when there's a blockage in one of the small oil glands near the eyelashes. Unlike a sty, a chalazion usually isn't painful and tends to be most prominent on the inner side of the eyelid. Treatment for both conditions is similar.
Most sties are harmless to your eye and won't affect your ability to see clearly. Try self-care measures first, such as applying a warm washcloth to your closed eyelid for five to 10 minutes several times a day and gently massaging the eyelid. Contact your doctor if: The sty doesn't start to improve after 48 hours, Redness and swelling involves the entire eyelid or extends into your cheek or other parts of your face.
A sty is caused by an infection of oil glands in the eyelid. The bacterium staphylococcus is commonly responsible for most of these infections.
You are at increased risk of a sty if you: Touch your eyes with unwashed hands, Insert your contact lenses without thoroughly disinfecting them or washing your hands first, Leave on eye makeup overnight, Use old or expired cosmetics, Have blepharitis, a chronic inflammation along the edge of the eyelid, Have rosacea, a skin condition characterized by facial redness.
The most obvious sign of a subconjunctival hemorrhage is a bright red patch on the white (sclera) of your eye.
Despite its bloody appearance, a subconjunctival hemorrhage should cause no change in your vision, no discharge from your eye and no pain. Your only discomfort may be a scratchy feeling on the surface of your eye.
If you have recurrent subconjunctival hemorrhages or other bleeding, talk to your doctor.
The cause of a subconjunctival hemorrhage isn't always known. The following actions may cause a small blood vessel to rupture in your eye: Violent coughing, Powerful sneezing, Straining, Vomiting.
In some cases, a subconjunctival hemorrhage may result from an eye injury, including: Roughly rubbing your eye, Trauma, such as a foreign object injuring your eye.
Risk factors for a subconjunctival hemorrhage include: Diabetes, High blood pressure (hypertension), Certain blood-thinning medications, such as warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven) and aspirin, Blood-clotting disorders.
Health complications from a subconjunctival hemorrhage are rare. If your condition is due to trauma, your doctor may evaluate your eye to ensure you don't have other eye complications or injury.
Sudden cardiac arrest signs and symptoms are immediate and drastic and include: Sudden collapse, No pulse, No breathing, Loss of consciousness.
Sometimes other signs and symptoms occur before sudden cardiac arrest. These might include: Chest discomfort, Shortness of breath, Weakness, Palpitations.
But sudden cardiac arrest often occurs with no warning.
See your doctor promptly if you have episodes of: Chest pain or discomfort, Heart palpitations, Rapid or irregular heartbeats, Unexplained wheezing, Shortness of breath, Fainting or near fainting, Lightheadedness or dizziness.
If you're currently having these symptoms, call 911 or emergency medical help.
When the heart stops, the lack of oxygenated blood can cause death or permanent brain damage in minutes. Time is critical when you're helping an unconscious person who isn't breathing.
If you see someone who's unconscious and not breathing normally, do the following:
Call 911 or the emergency number in your area. If you have immediate access to a telephone, call before beginning CPR.
Perform CPR. Quickly check the breathing. If the person isn't breathing normally, begin CPR. Push hard and fast on the person's chest — at the rate of 100 to 120 compressions a minute. If you've been trained in CPR, check the person's airway and deliver rescue breaths after every 30 compressions.
If you haven't been trained, just continue chest compressions. Allow the chest to rise completely between compressions. Keep doing this until a portable defibrillator is available or emergency workers arrive.
Use a portable defibrillator, if one is available. It will give you step-by-step voice instructions. Continue chest compressions while the defibrillator is charging. Deliver one shock if advised by the device and then immediately resume CPR, starting with chest compressions, or give chest compressions only, for about two minutes.
Using the defibrillator, check the person's heart rhythm. If necessary, the defibrillator will give another shock. Repeat this cycle until the person recovers consciousness or emergency workers take over.
Portable automated external defibrillators (AEDs) are available in many places, including airports, casinos and shopping malls. You can also purchase one for your home. AEDs come with built-in instructions for their use. They're programmed to allow a shock only when appropriate.
A problem in your heart rhythm (arrhythmia) — the result of a problem with your heart's electrical system — is the usual cause of sudden cardiac arrest.
The heart's electrical system controls the rate and rhythm of your heartbeat. If something goes wrong, your heart can beat too fast, too slowly or irregularly (arrhythmia). Often these arrhythmias are brief and harmless, but some types can lead to sudden cardiac arrest.
The most common heart rhythm at the time of cardiac arrest is an arrhythmia in a lower chamber of your heart (ventricle). Rapid, erratic electrical impulses cause your ventricles to quiver uselessly instead of pumping blood (ventricle fibrillation).
Sudden cardiac arrest can happen in people who have no known heart diease. However, a life-threatening arrhythmia usually develops in a person with a pre-existing, possibly undiagnosed heart condition. Conditions include:
Coronary artery disease. Most cases of sudden cardiac arrest occur in people who have coronary artery disease, in which your arteries become clogged with cholesterol and other deposits, reducing blood flow to your heart.
Heart attack. If a heart attack occurs, often as a result of severe coronary artery disease, it can trigger ventricular fibrillation and sudden cardiac arrest. Also, a heart attack can leave scar tissue in your heart. Electrical short circuits around the scar tissue can lead to abnormalities in your heart rhythm.
Enlarged heart (cardiomyopathy). This occurs primarily when your heart's muscular walls stretch and enlarge or thicken. Then your heart's muscle is abnormal, a condition that often leads to arrhythmias.
Valvular heart disease. Leaking or narrowing of your heart valves can lead to stretching or thickening of your heart muscle. When the chambers become enlarged or weakened because of stress caused by a tight or leaking valve, there's an increased risk of developing arrhythmia.
Congenital heart disease. When sudden cardiac arrest occurs in children or adolescents, it can be due to a heart defect that was present at birth (congenital heart disease). Adults who've had corrective surgery for a congenital heart defect still have a higher risk of sudden cardiac arrest.
Electrical problems in the heart. In some people, the problem is in the heart's electrical system itself instead of a problem with the heart muscle or valves. These are called primary heart rhythm abnormalities and include conditions such as Brugada's syndrome and long QT syndrome.
Because sudden cardiac arrest is so often linked with coronary artery disease, the same factors that put you at risk of coronary artery disease can also put you at risk of sudden cardiac arrest. These include: A family history of coronary artery disease, Smoking, High blood pressure, High blood cholesterol, Obesity, Diabetes, A sedentary lifestyle.
Other factors that might increase your risk of sudden cardiac arrest include: A previous episode of cardiac arrest or a family history of cardiac arrest, A previous heart attack, A personal or family history of other forms of heart disease, such as heart rhythm disorders, congenital heart defects, heart failure and cardiomyopathy, Age — the incidence of sudden cardiac arrest increases with age, Being male, Using illegal drugs, such as cocaine or amphetamines, Nutritional imbalance, such as low potassium or magnesium levels, Obstructive sleep apnea, Chronic kidney disease.
When sudden cardiac arrest occurs, reduced blood flow to your brain causes unconsciousness. If your heart rhythm doesn't rapidly return to normal, brain damage occurs and death results. Survivors of cardiac arrest might show signs of brain damage.
A combination of physical and sleep environmental factors can make an infant more vulnerable to SIDS. These factors vary from child to child.
Physical factors associated with SIDS include:
Brain defects. Some infants are born with problems that make them more likely to die of SIDS. In many of these babies, the portion of the brain that controls breathing and arousal from sleep hasn't matured enough to work properly.
Low birth weight. Premature birth or being part of a multiple birth increases the likelihood that a baby's brain hasn't matured completely, so he or she has less control over such automatic processes as breathing and heart rate.
Respiratory infection. Many infants who died of SIDS had recently had a cold, which might contribute to breathing problems.
The items in a baby's crib and his or her sleeping position can combine with a baby's physical problems to increase the risk of SIDS. Examples include:
Sleeping on the stomach or side. Babies placed in these positions to sleep might have more difficulty breathing than those placed on their backs.
Sleeping on a soft surface. Lying face down on a fluffy comforter, a soft mattress or a waterbed can block an infant's airway.
Sharing a bed. While the risk of SIDS is lowered if an infant sleeps in the same room as his or her parents, the risk increases if the baby sleeps in the same bed with parents, siblings or pets.
Overheating. Being too warm while sleeping can increase a baby's risk of SIDS.
Although sudden infant death syndrome can strike any infant, researchers have identified several factors that might increase a baby's risk. They include:
Sex. Boys are slightly more likely to die of SIDS.
Age. Infants are most vulnerable between the second and fourth months of life.
Race. For reasons that aren't well-understood, nonwhite infants are more likely to develop SIDS.
Family history. Babies who've had siblings or cousins die of SIDS are at higher risk of SIDS.
Secondhand smoke. Babies who live with smokers have a higher risk of SIDS.
Being premature. Both being born early and having a low birth weight increase your baby's chances of SIDS.
During pregnancy, the mother also affects her baby's risk of SIDS, especially if she: Is younger than 20, Smokes cigarettes, Uses drugs or alcohol, Has inadequate prenatal care.
Suicide warning signs or suicidal thoughts include: Talking about suicide — for example, making statements such as "I'm going to kill myself," "I wish I were dead" or "I wish I hadn't been born", Getting the means to take your own life, such as buying a gun or stockpiling pills, Withdrawing from social contact and wanting to be left alone, Having mood swings, such as being emotionally high one day and deeply discouraged the next, Being preoccupied with death, dying or violence, Feeling trapped or hopeless about a situation, Increasing use of alcohol or drugs, Changing normal routine, including eating or sleeping patterns, Doing risky or self-destructive things, such as using drugs or driving recklessly, Giving away belongings or getting affairs in order when there's no other logical explanation for doing this, Saying goodbye to people as if they won't be seen again, Developing personality changes or being severely anxious or agitated, particularly when experiencing some of the warning signs listed above.
Warning signs aren't always obvious, and they may vary from person to person. Some people make their intentions clear, while others keep suicidal thoughts and feelings secret.
If you're feeling suicidal, but you aren't immediately thinking of hurting yourself: Reach out to a close friend or loved one — even though it may be hard to talk about your feelings, Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone in your faith community, Call a suicide hotline, Make an appointment with your doctor, other health care provider or a mental health professional.
Suicidal thinking doesn't get better on its own — so get help.
Suicidal thoughts have many causes. Most often, suicidal thoughts are the result of feeling like you can't cope when you're faced with what seems to be an overwhelming life situation. If you don't have hope for the future, you may mistakenly think suicide is a solution. You may experience a sort of tunnel vision, where in the middle of a crisis you believe suicide is the only way out.
There also may be a genetic link to suicide. People who complete suicide or who have suicidal thoughts or behavior are more likely to have a family history of suicide.
Although attempted suicide is more frequent for women, men are more likely than women to complete suicide because they typically use more-lethal methods, such as a firearm.
You may be at risk of suicide if you: Attempted suicide before, Feel hopeless, worthless, agitated, socially isolated or lonely, Experience a stressful life event, such as the loss of a loved one, military service, a breakup, or financial or legal problems, Have a substance abuse problem — alcohol and drug abuse can worsen thoughts of suicide and make you feel reckless or impulsive enough to act on your thoughts, Have suicidal thoughts and have access to firearms in your home, Have an underlying psychiatric disorder, such as major depression, post-traumatic stress disorder or bipolar disorder, Have a family history of mental disorders, substance abuse, suicide, or violence, including physical or sexual abuse, Have a medical condition that can be linked to depression and suicidal thinking, such as chronic disease, chronic pain or terminal illness, Are lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender with an unsupportive family or in a hostile environment.
Suicide in children and teenagers can follow stressful life events. What a young person sees as serious and insurmountable may seem minor to an adult — such as problems in school or the loss of a friendship. In some cases, a child or teen may feel suicidal due to certain life circumstances that he or she may not want to talk about, such as: Having a psychiatric disorder, including depression, Loss or conflict with close friends or family members, History of physical or sexual abuse, Problems with alcohol or drugs, Physical or medical issues, for example, becoming pregnant or having a sexually transmitted infection, Being the victim of bullying, Being uncertain of sexual orientation, Reading or hearing an account of suicide or knowing a peer who died by suicide.
If you have concerns about a friend or family member, asking about suicidal thoughts and intentions is the best way to identify risk.
In rare cases, people who are suicidal are at risk of killing others and then themselves. Known as a homicide-suicide or murder-suicide, some risk factors include: History of conflict with a spouse or romantic partner, Current family legal or financial problems, History of mental health problems, particularly depression, Alcohol or drug abuse, Having access to a firearm.
Most antidepressants are generally safe, but the Food and Drug Administration requires that all antidepressants carry black box warnings, the strictest warnings for prescriptions. In some cases, children, teenagers and young adults under 25 may have an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed.
However, keep in mind that antidepressants are more likely to reduce suicide risk in the long run by improving mood.
Suicidal thoughts and attempted suicide take an emotional toll. For instance, you may be so consumed by suicidal thoughts that you can't function in your daily life. And while many attempted suicides are impulsive acts during a moment of crisis, they can leave you with permanent serious or severe injuries, such as organ failure or brain damage.
For those left behind after a suicide — people known as survivors of suicide — grief, anger, depression and guilt are common.
The appearance of skin affected by sun allergy can vary widely, depending on what's causing the problem. Signs and symptoms may include: Redness, Itching or pain, Tiny bumps that may merge into raised patches, Scaling, crusting or bleeding, Blisters or hives.
Signs and symptoms usually occur only on skin that has been exposed to the sun and typically develop within minutes to hours after sun exposure.
See a doctor if you have unusual, bothersome skin reactions after exposure to sunlight. For severe or persistent symptoms, you may need to see a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating skin disorders (dermatologist).
Certain medications, chemicals and medical conditions can make the skin more sensitive to the sun. It isn't clear why some people have a sun allergy and others don't. Inherited traits may play a role.
Risk factors for having an allergic reaction to sunlight include:
Race. Anyone can have a sun allergy, but certain sun allergies are more common in people with lighter skin.
Exposure to certain substances. Some skin allergy symptoms are triggered when your skin is exposed to a substance and then to sunlight. Common substances responsible for this type of reaction include fragrances, disinfectants and even some chemicals used in sunscreens.
Taking certain medications. A number of medications can make the skin sunburn more quickly — including tetracycline antibiotics, sulfa-based drugs and pain relievers, such as ketoprofen.
Having another skin condition. Having dermatitis increases your risk of having a sun allergy.
Having blood relatives with a sun allergy. You're more likely to have a sun allergy if you have a sibling or parent with a sun allergy.
Sunburn signs and symptoms can include: Changes in skin tone, such as pinkness or redness, Skin that feels warm or hot to the touch, Pain and tenderness, Swelling, Small fluid-filled blisters, which may break, Headache, fever, nausea and fatigue, if the sunburn is severe, Eyes that feel painful or gritty.
Any exposed part of your body — including your earlobes, scalp and lips — can burn. Even covered areas can burn if, for example, your clothing has a loose weave that allows ultraviolet (UV) light through. Your eyes, which are extremely sensitive to the sun's UV light, also can burn.
Sunburn signs and symptoms usually appear within a few hours after sun exposure. But it may take a day or more to know how severe the sunburn is.
Within a few days, your body may start to heal itself by peeling the damaged skin's top layer. After peeling, your skin may temporarily have an irregular color and pattern. A bad sunburn may take several days to heal.
See your doctor if the sunburn: Is blistering and covers a large portion of your body, Develops blisters on the face, hands or genitals, Is causing severe swelling, Shows signs of infection, such as pain, pus or red streaks leading away from an open blister, Doesn't improve within a few days.
Seek emergency medical care if you are sunburned and experience A fever over 103 degrees, Confusion, Fainting, Dehydration.
Sunburn is caused by too much exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light. UV light may be from sunlight or artificial sources, such as sunlamps and tanning beds.
Melanin is the dark pigment in the skin's outer layer that gives skin its normal color. When you're exposed to UV light, your body protects itself by producing melanin faster. The extra melanin creates tan. A suntan is the body's way of blocking UV rays to prevent sunburn. But the protection only goes so far. Too much UV light causes skin to burn.
You can get sunburn on cool or cloudy days. Snow, sand, water and other surfaces can reflect UV rays that cause the skin to burn too.
Risk factors for sunburn include: Having light skin, blue eyes, and red or blond hair, Living or vacationing somewhere sunny, warm or at high altitude, Working outdoors, Swimming or spraying your skin with water, as wet skin tends to burn more than does dry skin, Mixing outdoor recreation and drinking alcohol, Regularly exposing unprotected skin to UV light from sunlight or artificial sources, such as tanning beds, Taking a drug that makes you more likely to burn (photosensitizing medications).
Intense, repeated sun exposure that results in sunburn increases your risk of other skin damage and certain diseases. These include premature aging of skin (photoaging), precancerous skin lesions and skin cancer.
Sun exposure and repeated sunburns accelerate the skin's aging process, making you look older than you are. Skin changes caused by UV light are called photoaging. The results of photoaging include: Weakening of connective tissues, which reduces the skin's strength and elasticity, Deep wrinkles, Dry, rough skin, Fine red veins on your cheeks, nose and ears, Freckles, mostly on your face and shoulders, Dark or discolored spots (macules) on your face, back of hands, arms, chest and upper back — also called solar lentigines (len-TIJ-ih-neze).
Precancerous skin lesions appear as rough, scaly patches in areas that have been damaged by the sun. They're usually found on the sun-exposed areas of the head, face, neck and hands of light-skinned people. These patches can evolve into skin cancer. They're also called actinic keratoses (ak-TIN-ik ker-uh-TOE-seez) and solar keratoses.
Excessive sun exposure, even without sunburn, increases your risk of skin cancer, such as melanoma. It can damage the DNA of skin cells. Sunburns in childhood and adolescence may increase your risk of developing melanoma later in life.
Skin cancer develops mainly on areas of the body most exposed to sunlight, including the scalp, face, lips, ears, neck, chest, arms, hands, legs and back.
Some types of skin cancer appear as a small growth or a sore that bleeds easily, crusts over, heals and then reopens. With melanoma, an existing mole may change, or a new, suspicious-looking mole may develop. A type of melanoma called lentigo maligna develops in areas of long-term sun exposure. It starts as a tan flat spot that slowly darkens and enlarges.
See your doctor if you notice a new skin growth, a bothersome change in your skin, a change in the appearance or texture of a mole, or a sore that doesn't heal.
The sun can also burn your eyes. Too much UV light damages the retina, lens or cornea. Sun damage to the lens can lead to clouding of the lens (cataracts). Sunburned eyes may feel painful or gritty. Sunburn of the cornea is also called snow blindness.
Breast tissue normally might feel lumpy or ropy and you may have tenderness that comes and goes with your menstrual period.
If you have an underlying breast condition, you might notice changes in how your breasts normally feel, such as: A round, smooth and firm breast lump, A large, solid-feeling lump that moves easily under your skin, A hard, irregular-shaped breast lump, Skin redness or dimpling like an orange, Changes in breast size or shape, Fluid leaking from your nipple.
Breast lumps can result from:
Breast cysts. If you find a breast lump that feels round, smooth and firm, it could be a cyst — a dilated milk duct filled with fluid. A breast cyst can be large or small, and the surrounding breast tissue may be tender. A breast cyst may appear before your menstrual period and get smaller or disappear afterward.
Fibrocystic breast changes. With fibrocystic breast changes, you may feel fullness in your breasts with areas of lumpiness or ridgelike areas. Your breasts may feel tender. Many women experience fibrocystic breast changes related to their menstrual cycles that tend to improve after the menstrual cycle.
Fibroadenomas. Fibroadenomas are solid, noncancerous breast tumors that are smooth and move easily under your skin when touched. A fibroadenoma may grow larger. Factors that may be associated with fibroadenoma growth include being pregnant, using hormone therapy or menstruation.
Injuries and infections. A severe injury to your breast tissue or nearby nerves can create a breast lump. Doctors describe this condition as fat necrosis. A collection of infected fluid (abscess) in breast tissue also can cause a breast lump, one that's often associated with localized breast pain and inflammation of the skin.
Breast cancer. A breast lump that's painless, hard, irregularly shaped and different from surrounding breast tissue might be breast cancer. Skin covering the lump may look red, dimpled or pitted like the skin of an orange. Your breast size and shape may change, or you may notice discharge from the nipple.
Only by seeing your doctor for evaluation can you be certain of what kinds of tests you might need and which type of breast lump you have.
Some people naturally sweat more or less than other people. Body odor also can vary from person to person. See a doctor if: You suddenly begin to sweat much more or less than usual, Sweating disrupts your daily routine, You experience night sweats for no apparent reason, You notice a change in your body odor.
Sweating and body odor are caused by sweat glands in your body. The two main types of sweat glands are eccrine glands and apocrine glands. Eccrine glands occur over most of your body and open directly onto the surface of the skin. When your body temperature rises, these glands release fluids that cool your body as they evaporate.
Apocrine glands are found in areas where you have hair, such as your armpits and groin. These glands release a milky fluid when you're stressed. This fluid is odorless until it combines with bacteria on your skin.
The main sign of Sweet's syndrome is small red bumps on your arms, neck, head or trunk. They often appear abruptly after a fever or upper respiratory infection. The bumps grow quickly in size, spreading into painful clusters up to an inch (2.5 centimeters) or so in diameter.
If you develop a painful, red rash that quickly grows in size, see your doctor for appropriate treatment.
In most cases, the cause of Sweet's syndrome isn't known. Sweet's syndrome is sometimes associated with cancer, most often leukemia.
Occasionally, this disorder may be associated with a solid tumor, such as breast or colon cancer. Sweet's syndrome may also occur as a reaction to a medication — most commonly a type of drug that boosts production of white blood cells.
Sweet's syndrome is uncommon, but certain factors increase your risk, including:
Sex. In general, women are more likely to have Sweet's syndrome than are men.
Age. Though older adults and even infants can develop Sweet's syndrome, the condition mainly affects people between the ages of 30 and 60.
Cancer. Sweet's syndrome is sometimes associated with cancer, most often leukemia. Sometimes, Sweet's syndrome may be associated with a solid tumor, such as breast or colon cancer.
Other health problems. Sweet's syndrome may follow an upper respiratory infection, and many people report having flu-like symptoms before the rash appears. Sweet's syndrome can also be associated with inflammatory bowel disease.
Pregnancy. Some women develop Sweet's syndrome during pregnancy.
Drug sensitivity. Sweet's syndrome may result from a sensitivity to medication. Drugs linked to Sweet's syndrome include azathioprine (Azasan, Imuran), granulocyte colony stimulating factor, certain antibiotics and some nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
There is a risk of the skin lesions becoming infected. Follow your doctor's recommendations for caring for the affected skin.
In cases where Sweet's syndrome is associated with cancer, the eruptions of the lesions may be the first sign of cancer either appearing or recurring.
Swimmer's ear symptoms are usually mild at first, but they can worsen if your infection isn't treated or spreads. Doctors often classify swimmer's ear according to mild, moderate and advanced stages of progression. Itching in your ear canal, Slight redness inside your ear, Mild discomfort that's made worse by pulling on your outer ear (pinna or auricle) or pushing on the little "bump" in front of your ear (tragus), Some drainage of clear, odorless fluid.
More-intense itching, Increasing pain, More-extensive redness in your ear, Excessive fluid drainage, Feeling of fullness inside your ear and partial blockage of your ear canal by swelling, fluid and debris, Decreased or muffled hearing.
Severe pain that might radiate to your face, neck or side of your head, Complete blockage of your ear canal, Redness or swelling of your outer ear, Swelling in the lymph nodes in your neck, Fever.
Contact your doctor if you have even mild signs or symptoms of swimmer's ear.
Call your doctor immediately or visit the emergency room if you have: Severe pain, Fever.
Swimmer's ear is an infection that's usually caused by bacteria. It's less common for a fungus or virus to cause swimmer's ear.
Your outer ear canals have natural defenses that help keep them clean and prevent infection. Protective features include:
Glands that secrete a waxy substance (cerumen). These secretions form a thin, water-repellent film on the skin inside your ear. Cerumen is also slightly acidic, which helps further discourage bacterial growth.
Cerumen also collects dirt, dead skin cells and other debris and helps move these particles out of your ear, leaving the familiar earwax you find at the opening of your ear canal.
Cartilage that partly covers the ear canal. This helps prevent foreign bodies from entering the canal.
If you have swimmer's ear, your natural defenses have been overwhelmed. Conditions that can weaken your ear's defenses and promote bacterial growth include:
Excess moisture in your ear. Heavy perspiration, prolonged humid weather or water that remains in your ear after swimming can create a favorable environment for bacteria.
Scratches or abrasions in your ear canal. Cleaning your ear with a cotton swab or hairpin, scratching inside your ear with a finger, or wearing earbuds or hearing aids can cause small breaks in the skin that allow bacteria to grow.
Sensitivity reactions. Hair products or jewelry can cause allergies and skin conditions that promote infection.
Factors that can increase your risk of swimmer's ear include: Swimming, Getting water that has high bacteria levels in your ear, Aggressive cleaning of the ear canal with cotton swabs or other objects, Use of certain devices, such as earbuds or a hearing aid, Skin allergies or irritation from jewelry, hair spray, or hair dyes.
Swimmer's ear usually isn't serious if treated promptly, but complications can occur.
Temporary hearing loss. You might have muffled hearing that usually gets better after the infection clears.
Long-term infection (chronic otitis externa). An outer ear infection is usually considered chronic if signs and symptoms persist for more than three months. Chronic infections are more common if there are conditions that make treatment difficult, such as a rare strain of bacteria, an allergic skin reaction, an allergic reaction to antibiotic eardrops, a skin condition such as dermatitis or psoriasis, or a combination of a bacterial and a fungal infection.
Deep tissue infection (cellulitis). Rarely, swimmer's ear can spread into deep layers and connective tissues of the skin.
Bone and cartilage damage (early skull base osteomyelitis). This is a rare complication of swimmer's ear that occurs as the infection spreads to the cartilage of the outer ear and bones of the lower part of the skull, causing increasingly severe pain. Older adults, people with diabetes or people with weakened immune systems are at increased risk of this complication.
More-widespread infection. If swimmer's ear develops into advanced skull base osteomyelitis, the infection can spread and affect other parts of your body, such as the brain or nearby nerves. This rare complication can be life-threatening.
The itchy rash associated with swimmer's itch looks like reddish pimples or blisters. It may appear within minutes or days after swimming or wading in infested water.
Swimmer's itch usually affects only exposed skin — skin not covered by swimsuits, wet suits or waders. Signs and symptoms of swimmer's itch typically worsen with each exposure to the parasites.
Talk to your doctor if you have a rash after swimming that lasts more than three days. If you notice pus at the rash site, consult your doctor. You might be referred to a doctor who specializes in skin conditions (dermatologist).
The parasites that cause swimmer's itch live in the blood of waterfowl and in mammals that live near ponds and lakes. Examples include: Geese, Ducks, Gulls, Beavers, Muskrats.
The parasite's eggs enter the water via their hosts' feces. Before infecting birds, other animals or people, the hatched parasites must live for a time within a type of snail. These snails live near the shoreline, which explains why infections occur most often in shallow water.
Swimmer's itch isn't contagious from person to person, so you don't need to worry about catching swimmer's itch from someone who has this itchy rash.
The parasites that cause swimmer's itch live in the blood of waterfowl and in mammals that live near ponds and lakes. The more time you spend in infested water, the higher your risk of swimmer's itch. Children may have the highest risk, since they tend to play in shallow water and are less likely to dry off with a towel.
Some people are more sensitive to swimmer's itch than others are. And, your sensitivity can increase each time you're exposed to the parasites that cause swimmer's itch.
Swimmer's itch rarely leads to complications, but your skin can become infected if you scratch too vigorously. Try to avoid scratching the rash.
Signs and symptoms typically include:
Swelling. The skin around your kneecap can puff up noticeably, especially when you compare the affected knee to the normal one.
Stiffness. When your knee joint contains excess fluid, you might not be able to bend or straighten your leg completely.
Pain. Depending on the cause of the fluid buildup, the knee might be very painful — to the point that it's difficult or impossible to bear weight on it.
See your doctor if: Self-care measures or prescribed medications don't relieve the pain and swelling, One knee becomes red and feels warm to the touch compared to your other knee.
Many types of problems, ranging from traumatic injuries to diseases and other conditions, can cause a swollen knee.
Damage to any part of your knee can cause excess joint fluid to accumulate. Injuries that can cause fluid buildup in and around the knee joint include: Torn ligament, particularly the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL), Cartilage (meniscus) tear, Irritation from overuse, Broken bones.
Underlying diseases and conditions that can produce fluid buildup in and around the knee joint include: Osteoarthritis, Rheumatoid arthritis, Infection, Gout, Pseudogout, Bursitis, Cysts, Tumors.
Age. Your likelihood of developing a swollen knee related to arthritis increases as you age.
Sports. People who participate in sports that involve twisting the knee, such as basketball, are more likely to experience the types of knee injuries that cause swelling.
Obesity. Excess weight puts added stress on the knee joint, contributing to the tissue and joint overload and knee degeneration that can lead to a swollen knee. Obesity increases your risk of osteoarthritis, one of the more frequent causes of knee swelling.
Complications of a swollen knee can include:
Muscle loss. Fluid in the knee can harm the working of your muscles and cause thigh muscles to weaken and atrophy.
Fluid-filled sac (Baker's cyst). The buildup of fluid in your knee can lead to the formation of a Baker's cyst in the back of your knee. A swollen Baker's cyst can be painful, but usually improves with icing and compression. If the swelling is severe, you might need to have fluid removed (cyst aspiration).
Your lymphatic system is a network of organs, vessels and lymph nodes situated throughout your body. Many lymph nodes are located in your head and neck region. Lymph nodes that frequently swell are in this area, as well as in your armpits and groin area.
Swollen lymph nodes are a sign that something is wrong somewhere in your body. When your lymph nodes first swell, you might notice: Tenderness and pain in the lymph nodes, Swelling that may be the size of a pea or kidney bean, or even larger in the lymph nodes.
Depending on the cause of your swollen lymph nodes, other signs and symptoms you might have include: Runny nose, sore throat, fever and other indications of an upper respiratory infection, General swelling of lymph nodes throughout your body. When this occurs, it may indicate an infection, such as HIV or mononucleosis, or an immune system disorder, such as lupus or rheumatoid arthritis, Hard, fixed, rapidly growing nodes, indicating a possible cancer or lymphoma, Fever, Night sweats.
Some swollen lymph nodes return to normal when the underlying condition, such as a minor infection, gets better. See your doctor if you're concerned or if your swollen lymph nodes: Have appeared for no apparent reason, Continue to enlarge or have been present for two to four weeks, Feel hard or rubbery, or don't move when you push on them, Are accompanied by persistent fever, night sweats or unexplained weight loss.
Seek immediate medical care if you're having difficulty swallowing or breathing.
Lymph nodes are small, round or bean-shaped clusters of cells. Inside lymph nodes are a combination of different types of immune system cells. These specialized cells filter your lymphatic fluid as it travels through your body and protect you by destroying invaders.
Lymph nodes are located in groups, and each group drains a specific area of your body. You may be more likely to notice swelling in certain areas, such as in the lymph nodes in your neck, under your chin, in your armpits and in your groin. The site of the swollen lymph nodes may help identify the underlying cause.
The most common cause of swollen lymph nodes is an infection, particularly a viral infection, such as the common cold. Other possible causes of swollen lymph nodes include: Strep throat, Measles, Ear infections, Infected (abscessed) tooth, Mononucleosis, Skin or wound infections, such as cellulitis, Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) — the virus that causes AIDS.
Tuberculosis, Certain sexually transmitted infections, such as syphilis, Toxoplasmosis — a parasitic infection resulting from contact with the feces of an infected cat or eating undercooked meat, Cat scratch fever — a bacterial infection from a cat scratch or bite.
Lupus — a chronic inflammatory disease that targets your joints, skin, kidneys, blood cells, heart and lungs, Rheumatoid arthritis — a chronic inflammatory disease targeting the tissue that lines your joints (synovium).
Lymphoma — cancer that originates in your lymphatic system, Leukemia — cancer of your body's blood-forming tissue, including your bone marrow and lymphatic system, Other cancers that have spread (metastasized) to lymph nodes.
Other possible but rare causes include certain medications, such as the anti-seizure medication phenytoin (Dilantin) and preventive medications for malaria.
If infection is the cause of your swollen lymph nodes and isn't treated, an abscess may form. Abscesses are localized collections of pus caused by infections. Pus contains fluid, white blood cells, dead tissue, and bacteria or other invaders. An abscess may require drainage and antibiotic treatment.
Syphilis develops in stages, and symptoms vary with each stage. But the stages may overlap, and symptoms don't always occur in the same order. You may be infected with syphilis and not notice any symptoms for years.
The first sign of syphilis is a small sore, called a chancre (SHANG-kur). The sore appears at the spot where the bacteria entered your body. While most people infected with syphilis develop only one chancre, some people develop several of them.
The chancre usually develops about three weeks after exposure. Many people who have syphilis don't notice the chancre because it's usually painless, and it may be hidden within the vagina or rectum. The chancre will heal on its own within three to six weeks.
Within a few weeks of the original chancre healing, you may experience a rash that begins on your trunk but eventually covers your entire body — even the palms of your hands and the soles of your feet. This rash is usually not itchy and may be accompanied by wartlike sores in your mouth or genital area. Some people also experience hair loss, muscle aches, a fever, a sore throat and swollen lymph nodes. These signs and symptoms may disappear within a few weeks or repeatedly come and go for as long as a year.
If you aren't treated for syphilis, the disease moves from the secondary stage to the hidden (latent) stage, when you have no symptoms. The latent stage can last for years. Signs and symptoms may never return, or the disease may progress to the third (tertiary) stage.
About 15% to 30% of people infected with syphilis who don't get treatment will develop complications known as late (tertiary) syphilis. In the late stage, the disease may damage your brain, nerves, eyes, heart, blood vessels, liver, bones and joints. These problems may occur many years after the original, untreated infection.
At any stage, syphilis can spread and, among other damage, cause damage to the brain and nervous system (neurosyphilis) and the eye (ocular syphilis).
Babies born to women who have syphilis can become infected through the placenta or during birth. Most newborns with congenital syphilis have no symptoms, although some experience a rash on the palms of their hands and the soles of their feet. Later signs and symptoms may include deafness, teeth deformities and saddle nose — where the bridge of the nose collapses.
However, babies born with syphilis can also be born too early, be born dead (stillborn) or die after birth.
Call your doctor if you or your child experiences any unusual discharge, sore or rash — particularly if it occurs in the groin area.
The cause of syphilis is a bacterium called Treponema pallidum. The most common route of transmission is through contact with an infected person's sore during sexual activity. The bacteria enter your body through minor cuts or abrasions in your skin or mucous membranes. Syphilis is contagious during its primary and secondary stages, and sometimes in the early latent period.
Less commonly, syphilis may spread through direct unprotected close contact with an active lesion (such as during kissing) or through infected mothers to their babies during pregnancy or childbirth (congenital syphilis).
Syphilis can't be spread by using the same toilet, bathtub, clothing or eating utensils, or from doorknobs, swimming pools or hot tubs.
Once cured, syphilis doesn't recur on its own. However, you can become reinfected if you have contact with someone's syphilis sore.
You face an increased risk of acquiring syphilis if you: Engage in unprotected sex, Have sex with multiple partners, Are a man who has sex with men, Are infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
Without treatment, syphilis can lead to damage throughout your body. Syphilis also increases the risk of HIV infection and, for women, can cause problems during pregnancy. Treatment can help prevent future damage but can't repair or reverse damage that's already occurred.
Called gummas, these bumps can develop on your skin, bones, liver or any other organ in the late stage of syphilis. Gummas usually disappear after treatment with antibiotics.
Syphilis can cause a number of problems with your nervous system, including: Headache, Stroke, Meningitis, Hearing loss, Visual problems, including blindness, Dementia, Loss of pain and temperature sensations, Sexual dysfunction in men (impotence), Bladder incontinence.
These may include bulging (aneurysm) and inflammation of the aorta — your body's major artery — and of other blood vessels. Syphilis may also damage heart valves.
Adults with sexually transmitted syphilis or other genital ulcers have an estimated two- to fivefold increased risk of contracting HIV. A syphilis sore can bleed easily, providing an easy way for HIV to enter your bloodstream during sexual activity.
If you're pregnant, you may pass syphilis to your unborn baby. Congenital syphilis greatly increases the risk of miscarriage, stillbirth or your newborn's death within a few days after birth.
Syringomyelia symptoms usually develop slowly over time. If your syringomyelia is caused by protrusion of brain tissue into your spinal canal (Chiari malformation), symptoms generally begin between ages 25 and 40.
In some cases, coughing or straining can trigger symptoms of syringomyelia, although neither causes syringomyelia.
Signs and symptoms of syringomyelia, which might affect your back, shoulders, arms or legs, can include: Muscle weakness and wasting (atrophy), Loss of reflexes, Loss of sensitivity to pain and temperature, Headaches, Stiffness in your back, shoulders, arms and legs, Pain in your neck, arms and back, Spinal curvature (scoliosis).
If you have any of the signs or symptoms associated with syringomyelia, see your doctor.
If you've had a spinal cord injury, watch for signs and symptoms of syringomyelia. Months to years can pass after an injury before syringomyelia develops. Make sure your doctor knows you had a spinal cord injury.
It's unclear how and why syringomyelia happens. When it develops, cerebrospinal fluid — the fluid that surrounds, cushions and protects your brain and spinal cord — collects within the spinal cord itself, forming a fluid-filled cyst (syrinx).
Several conditions and diseases can lead to syringomyelia, including: Chiari malformation, a condition in which brain tissue protrudes into your spinal canal, Meningitis, an inflammation of the membranes surrounding your brain and spinal cord, Spinal cord tumor, which can interfere with the normal circulation of cerebrospinal fluid, Conditions present at birth, such as a tethered spinal cord, a condition caused when tissue attached to your spinal cord limits its movement, Spinal cord injury, which can cause symptoms months or years later.
In some people, syringomyelia can progress and lead to serious complications. Others have no symptoms.
Possible complications as a syrinx enlarges or if it damages nerves within your spinal cord include: An abnormal curve of your spine (scoliosis), Chronic pain as a result of spinal cord damage to the spinal cord, Motor difficulties, such as weakness and stiffness in your leg muscles that can affect your walking, Paralysis.
Attacks of systemic capillary leak syndrome are often preceded by one to two days of one or more nonspecific symptoms that may include: Irritability, Fatigue, Abdominal pain, Nausea, Muscle aches, Increased thirst, Sudden increase in body weight.
As the fluid leaks out from the bloodstream, blood volume and blood pressure drop. This can starve tissues in the kidneys, brain and liver of the oxygen and nutrients they need for normal function.
Symptoms of systemic mastocytosis include facial flushing, itching, or belly cramps. Other symptoms include feeling lightheaded or losing consciousness. Common triggers include alcohol, temperature changes, spicy foods, and certain medications.
When your heart is beating too fast, it may not pump enough blood to the rest of your body. This can starve your organs and tissues of oxygen and can cause the following tachycardia-related signs and symptoms: Shortness of breath, Lightheadedness, Rapid pulse rate, Heart palpitations — a racing, uncomfortable or irregular heartbeat or a sensation of "flopping" in the chest, Chest pain, Fainting (syncope).
Some people with tachycardia have no symptoms, and the condition is only discovered during a physical examination or with a heart-monitoring test called an electrocardiogram.
A number of conditions can cause a rapid heart rate and tachycardia symptoms. It's important to get a prompt, accurate diagnosis and appropriate care. See your doctor if you or your child has any tachycardia symptoms.
If you faint, have difficulty breathing or have chest pain lasting more than a few minutes, get emergency care, or call 911 or your local emergency number. Seek emergency care for anyone experiencing these symptoms.
Tachycardia is caused by something that disrupts the normal electrical impulses that control the rate of your heart's pumping action. Many things can cause or contribute to a fast heart rate. These include: Anemia, Drinking too many caffeinated beverages, Drinking too much alcohol, Exercise, Fever, High or low blood pressure, Imbalance of electrolytes, mineral-related substances necessary for conducting electrical impulses, Medication side effects, Overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism), Smoking, Sudden stress, such as fright, Use of stimulant drugs, such as cocaine or methamphetamine.
In some cases, the exact cause of tachycardia can't be determined.
To understand the causes of heart rate or rhythm problems such as tachycardia, it helps to understand how the heart's electrical system works.
Your heart is made up of four chambers — two upper chambers (atria) and two lower chambers (ventricles). Your heartbeat is normally controlled by a natural pacemaker called the sinus node, which is located in the right atrium. The sinus node produces electrical impulses that normally start each heartbeat.
From the sinus node, electrical impulses travel across the atria, causing the atrial muscles to contract and pump blood into the lower chambers of the heart (ventricles).
The electrical impulses then arrive at a cluster of cells called the atrioventricular (AV) node — usually the only pathway for signals to travel from the atria to the ventricles.
The AV node slows down the electrical signal before sending it to the ventricles. This slight delay allows the ventricles to fill with blood. When electrical impulses reach the muscles of the ventricles, they contract, causing them to pump blood either to the lungs or to the rest of the body.
When anything disrupts this complex system, it can cause the heart to beat too fast (tachycardia), too slow (bradycardia) or with an irregular rhythm.
Growing older or having a family history of tachycardia or other heart rhythm disorder makes you more likely to develop tachycardia.
Any condition that puts a strain on the heart or damages heart tissue can increase your risk of tachycardia. Such conditions include: Anemia, Diabetes, Heart disease, Heavy alcohol use, Heavy caffeine use, High blood pressure, Overactive or underactive thyroid, Psychological stress or anxiety, Sleep apnea, Smoking, Use of stimulant drugs.
Lifestyle changes or medical treatment for related health conditions may decrease your risk of tachycardia.
Complications of tachycardia depend on the type of tachycardia, how fast the heart is beating, how long the rapid heart rate lasts and if you have any other heart conditions.
Possible complications include: Blood clots that can cause a stroke or heart attack, Inability of the heart to pump enough blood (heart failure), Frequent fainting spells or unconsciousness, Sudden death, usually only associated with ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation.
The signs and symptoms of Takayasu's arteritis often occur in two stages.
In the first stage, you're likely to feel unwell with: Fatigue, Unintended weight loss, Muscle and joint aches and pains, Mild fever, sometimes accompanied by night sweats.
Not everyone has these early signs and symptoms. It's possible for inflammation to damage arteries for years before you realize something is wrong.
During the second stage, inflammation causes arteries to narrow so less blood and oxygen and fewer nutrients reach your organs and tissues. Stage 2 signs and symptoms may include: Weakness or pain in your limbs with use, Lightheadedness, dizziness or fainting, Headaches or visual changes, Memory problems or trouble thinking, Chest pain or shortness of breath, High blood pressure, Diarrhea or blood in your stool, Too few red blood cells (anemia).
Seek immediate medical attention for shortness of breath, chest or arm pain, or signs of a stroke, such as face drooping, limb weakness or speech disturbances.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have other signs or symptoms that worry you. Early detection of Takayasu's arteritis is key to getting effective treatment.
If you've already been diagnosed with Takayasu's arteritis, keep in mind that your symptoms may come and go even with effective treatment. Pay attention to symptoms similar to those that occurred originally or to any new ones, and be sure to tell your doctor promptly.
With Takayasu's arteritis, the aorta and other major arteries, including those leading to your head and kidneys, become inflamed. Over time the inflammation causes changes in these arteries, including thickening, narrowing and scarring.
No one knows exactly what causes the initial inflammation in Takayasu's arteritis. The condition is likely an autoimmune disease in which your immune system attacks your own arteries by mistake. The disease may be triggered by a virus or other infection.
Takayasu's arteritis primarily affects girls and women younger than 40. The disorder occurs worldwide, but it's most common in Asia. Sometimes the condition runs in families.
With Takayasu's arteritis, extended or recurring cycles of inflammation and healing in the arteries might lead to one or more of the following complications: Hardening and narrowing of blood vessels, which can cause reduced blood flow to organs and tissues, High blood pressure, usually as a result of decreased blood flow to your kidneys, Inflammation of the heart, which may affect the heart muscle or the heart valves, Heart failure due to high blood pressure, inflammation of the heart or aortic regurgitation — a condition in which a faulty aortic valve allows blood to leak back into your heart — or a combination of these, Stroke, which occurs as a result of reduced or blocked blood flow in arteries leading to your brain, Transient ischemic attack (TIA), which is like a stroke, producing similar symptoms but causing no permanent damage, Aneurysm in the aorta, which occurs when the walls of the blood vessel weaken and stretch out, forming a bulge that has the potential to rupture, Heart attack, which may occur as a result of reduced blood flow to the heart.
A healthy pregnancy is possible for women with Takayasu's arteritis. But the disease and drugs used to treat it can affect your fertility and pregnancy. If you have Takayasu's arteritis and are planning on becoming pregnant, work with your doctor to develop a plan to limit complications of pregnancy before you conceive. See your doctor regularly during your pregnancy for checkups.
Many people with intestinal tapeworm infection don't have symptoms. If you do have problems from the infection, your symptoms will depend on the type of tapeworm you have and its location. Invasive tapeworm infection symptoms vary depending on where the larvae have migrated.
Signs and symptoms of intestinal infection include: Nausea, Weakness, Loss of appetite, Abdominal pain, Diarrhea, Dizziness, Salt craving, Weight loss and inadequate absorption of nutrients from food.
If tapeworm larvae have migrated out of your intestines and formed cysts in other tissues, they can eventually cause organ and tissue damage, resulting in: Headaches, Cystic masses or lumps, Allergic reactions to the larvae, Neurological signs and symptoms, including seizures.
If you experience any of the signs or symptoms of tapeworm infection, seek medical attention.
A tapeworm infection starts after ingestion of tapeworm eggs or larvae.
Ingestion of eggs. If you eat food or drink water contaminated with feces from a person or animal with tapeworm, you ingest microscopic tapeworm eggs. For example, a pig infected with tapeworm will pass tapeworm eggs in its feces, which gets into the soil.
If this same soil comes in contact with a food or water source, it becomes contaminated. You can then be infected when you eat or drink something from the contaminated source.
Once inside your intestines, the eggs develop into larvae. At this stage, the larvae become mobile. If they migrate out of your intestines, they form cysts in other tissues, such as your lungs, central nervous system or liver.
Ingestion of larvae cysts in meat or muscle tissue. When an animal has a tapeworm infection, it has tapeworm larvae in its muscle tissue. If you eat raw or undercooked meat from an infected animal, you ingest the larvae, which then develop into adult tapeworms in your intestines.
Adult tapeworms can measure more than 80 feet (25 meters) long and can survive as long as 30 years in a host. Some tapeworms attach themselves to the walls of the intestines, where they cause irritation or mild inflammation, while others may pass through to your stool and exit your body.
Factors that may put you at greater risk of tapeworm infection include:
Poor hygiene. Infrequent washing and bathing increases the risk of accidental transfer of contaminated matter to your mouth.
Exposure to livestock. This is especially problematic in areas where human and animal feces are not disposed of properly.
Traveling to developing countries. Infection occurs more frequently in areas with poor sanitation practices.
Eating raw or undercooked meats. Improper cooking may fail to kill tapeworm eggs and larvae contained in contaminated pork or beef.
Living in endemic areas. In certain parts of the world, exposure to tapeworm eggs is more likely. For instance, your risk of coming into contact with eggs of the pork tapeworm (Taenia solium) is greater in areas of Latin America, China, sub-Saharan Africa or Southeast Asia where free-range pigs may be more common.
Intestinal tapeworm infections usually don't cause complications. If complications do occur, they may include:
Digestive blockage. If tapeworms grow large enough, they can block your appendix, leading to infection (appendicitis); your bile ducts, which carry bile from your liver and gallbladder to your intestine; or your pancreatic duct, which carries digestive fluids from your pancreas to your intestine.
Brain and central nervous system impairment. Called neurocysticercosis (noor-o-sis-tih-sur-KOE-sis), this especially dangerous complication of invasive pork tapeworm infection can result in headaches and visual impairment, as well as seizures, meningitis, hydrocephalus or dementia. Death can occur in severe cases of infection.
Organ function disruption. When larvae migrate to the liver, lungs or other organs, they become cysts. Over time, these cysts grow, sometimes large enough to crowd the functioning parts of the organ or reduce its blood supply. Tapeworm cysts sometimes rupture, releasing more larvae, which can move to other organs and form additional cysts.
A ruptured or leaking cyst can cause an allergy-like reaction, with itching, hives, swelling and difficulty breathing. Surgery or organ transplantation may be needed in severe cases.
In the most common form, an infant usually begins showing symptoms by about 6 months of age. Signs and symptoms of Tay-Sachs disease can include the following: Loss of motor skills, including turning over, crawling and sitting up, Exaggerated reactions when the baby hears loud noises, Seizures, Vision and hearing loss, "Cherry-red" spots in the eyes, Muscle weakness, Movement problems.
If your child has any of the signs or symptoms listed above, schedule an appointment with your child's doctor.
Tay-Sachs disease is a genetic disorder that is passed from parents to their children. It occurs when a child inherits the gene from both parents.
Risk factors for Tay-Sachs disease include having ancestors from: Eastern and Central European Jewish communities (Ashkenazi Jews), Certain French Canadian communities in Quebec, Old Order Amish community in Pennsylvania, Cajun community of Louisiana.
Teen depression signs and symptoms include a change from the teenager's previous attitude and behavior that can cause significant distress and problems at school or home, in social activities, or in other areas of life.
Depression symptoms can vary in severity, but changes in your teen's emotions and behavior may include the examples below.
Be alert for emotional changes, such as: Feelings of sadness, which can include crying spells for no apparent reason, Frustration or feelings of anger, even over small matters, Feeling hopeless or empty, Irritable or annoyed mood, Loss of interest or pleasure in usual activities, Loss of interest in, or conflict with, family and friends, Low self-esteem, Feelings of worthlessness or guilt, Fixation on past failures or exaggerated self-blame or self-criticism, Extreme sensitivity to rejection or failure, and the need for excessive reassurance, Trouble thinking, concentrating, making decisions and remembering things, Ongoing sense that life and the future are grim and bleak, Frequent thoughts of death, dying or suicide.
Watch for changes in behavior, such as: Tiredness and loss of energy, Insomnia or sleeping too much, Changes in appetite — decreased appetite and weight loss, or increased cravings for food and weight gain, Use of alcohol or drugs, Agitation or restlessness — for example, pacing, hand-wringing or an inability to sit still, Slowed thinking, speaking or body movements, Frequent complaints of unexplained body aches and headaches, which may include frequent visits to the school nurse, Social isolation, Poor school performance or frequent absences from school, Less attention to personal hygiene or appearance, Angry outbursts, disruptive or risky behavior, or other acting-out behaviors, Self-harm — for example, cutting, burning, or excessive piercing or tattooing, Making a suicide plan or a suicide attempt.
It can be difficult to tell the difference between ups and downs that are just part of being a teenager and teen depression. Talk with your teen. Try to determine whether he or she seems capable of managing challenging feelings, or if life seems overwhelming.
If depression signs and symptoms continue, begin to interfere in your teen's life, or cause you to have concerns about suicide or your teen's safety, talk to a doctor or a mental health professional trained to work with adolescents. Your teen's family doctor or pediatrician is a good place to start. Or your teen's school may recommend someone.
Depression symptoms likely won't get better on their own — and they may get worse or lead to other problems if untreated. Depressed teenagers may be at risk of suicide, even if signs and symptoms don't appear to be severe.
If you're a teen and you think you may be depressed — or you have a friend who may be depressed — don't wait to get help. Talk to a health care provider such as your doctor or school nurse. Share your concerns with a parent, a close friend, a spiritual leader, a teacher or someone else you trust.
Suicide is often associated with depression. If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
Also consider these options if you're having suicidal thoughts:
Call your mental health professional.
Call a suicide hotline. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) or use its webchat on suicidepreventionlifeline.org/chat.
Seek help from your primary care doctor or other health care provider.
Reach out to a close friend or loved one.
Contact a minister, spiritual leader or someone else in your faith community.
If a loved one or friend is in danger of attempting suicide or has made an attempt:
Make sure someone stays with that person.
Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
Or, if you can do so safely, take the person to the nearest hospital emergency room.
Never ignore comments or concerns about suicide. Always take action to get help.
It's not known exactly what causes depression, but a variety of issues may be involved. These include:
Brain chemistry. Neurotransmitters are naturally occurring brain chemicals that carry signals to other parts of your brain and body. When these chemicals are abnormal or impaired, the function of nerve receptors and nerve systems changes, leading to depression.
Hormones. Changes in the body's balance of hormones may be involved in causing or triggering depression.
Inherited traits. Depression is more common in people whose blood relatives — such as a parent or grandparent — also have the condition.
Early childhood trauma. Traumatic events during childhood, such as physical or emotional abuse, or loss of a parent, may cause changes in the brain that make a person more susceptible to depression.
Learned patterns of negative thinking. Teen depression may be linked to learning to feel helpless — rather than learning to feel capable of finding solutions for life's challenges.
Many factors increase the risk of developing or triggering teen depression, including: Having issues that negatively impact self-esteem, such as obesity, peer problems, long-term bullying or academic problems, Having been the victim or witness of violence, such as physical or sexual abuse, Having other mental health conditions, such as bipolar disorder, an anxiety disorder, a personality disorder, anorexia or bulimia, Having a learning disability or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), Having ongoing pain or a chronic physical illness such as cancer, diabetes or asthma, Having certain personality traits, such as low self-esteem or being overly dependent, self-critical or pessimistic, Abusing alcohol, nicotine or other drugs, Being gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgender in an unsupportive environment.
Family history and issues with family or others may also increase your teenager's risk of depression, such as: Having a parent, grandparent or other blood relative with depression, bipolar disorder or alcohol use problems, Having a family member who died by suicide, Having a dysfunctional family and family conflict, Having experienced recent stressful life events, such as parental divorce, parental military service or the death of a loved one.
Untreated depression can result in emotional, behavioral and health problems that affect every area of your teenager's life. Complications related to teen depression may include, for example: Alcohol and drug misuse, Academic problems, Family conflicts and relationship difficulties, Involvement with the juvenile justice system, Suicide attempts or suicide.
An unusual sensation (aura) may precede a temporal lobe seizure, acting as a warning. Not everyone who has temporal lobe seizures has auras, and not everyone who has auras remembers them.
The aura is actually the first part of a focal seizure before consciousness is impaired. Examples of auras include: A sudden sense of unprovoked fear or joy, A deja vu experience — a feeling that what's happening has happened before, A sudden or strange odor or taste, A rising sensation in the abdomen, similar to being on a roller coaster.
Sometimes temporal lobe seizures impair your ability to respond to others. This type of temporal lobe seizure usually lasts 30 seconds to two minutes. Characteristic signs and symptoms include: Loss of awareness of surroundings, Staring, Lip smacking, Repeated swallowing or chewing, Unusual finger movements, such as picking motions.
After a temporal lobe seizure, you may have: A period of confusion and difficulty speaking, Inability to recall what occurred during the seizure, Unawareness of having had a seizure, Extreme sleepiness.
In extreme cases, what starts as a temporal lobe seizure evolves into a generalized tonic-clonic (grand mal) seizure — featuring convulsions and loss of consciousness.
Seek immediate medical help if any of the following occurs:
The seizure lasts more than five minutes.
Breathing or consciousness doesn't return after the seizure stops.
A second seizure follows immediately.
Recovery isn't complete after the seizure is over.
Recovery is slower than usual after the seizure is over.
You have a high fever.
You're experiencing heat exhaustion.
You're pregnant.
You have diabetes.
You've injured yourself during the seizure.
If you experience a seizure for the first time, seek medical advice.
Seek medical advice in these circumstances: If you think you or your child is having seizures, When the number or severity of seizures increases significantly without explanation, When new signs or symptoms of seizures appear.
Often, the cause of temporal lobe seizures remains unknown. However, they can be a result of a number of factors, including: Traumatic brain injury, Infections, such as encephalitis or meningitis, or a history of such infections, A process that causes scarring (gliosis) in a part of the temporal lobe called the hippocampus, Blood vessel malformations in the brain, Stroke, Brain tumors, Genetic syndromes.
During normal waking and sleeping, your brain cells produce varying electrical activity. If the electrical activity in many brain cells becomes abnormally synchronized, a convulsion or seizure may occur.
If this happens in just one area of the brain, the result is a focal seizure. A temporal lobe seizure is a focal seizure that originates in one of the temporal lobes.
Over time, repeated temporal lobe seizures can cause the part of the brain that's responsible for learning and memory (hippocampus) to shrink. Brain cell loss in this area may cause memory problems.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis signs and symptoms include: Widespread skin pain, A spreading rash covering more than 30% of the body, Blisters and large areas of peeling skin, Sores, swelling and crusting on the mucous membranes, including the mouth, eyes and vagina.
Early treatment is key for people with Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN). If you have symptoms, seek immediate medical attention. You'll likely need care from a skin specialist (dermatologist) and other experts in a hospital.
SJS/TEN is usually caused by a skin reaction to medicine. The symptoms are likely to start showing up one to four weeks after you start taking a new drug.
The most common drug triggers of SJS/TEN include antibiotics, epilepsy drugs, sulfa drugs and allopurinol (Aloprim, Zyloprim).
Factors that increase your risk of SJS/TEN include:
HIV infection. Among people with HIV, the incidence of SJS/TEN is about 100 times greater than that among the general population.
A weakened immune system. The immune system can be affected by an organ transplant, HIV/AIDS and autoimmune diseases.
Cancer. People with cancer, especially blood cancers (hematologic malignancies), are at increased risk of SJS/TEN.
A history of SJS/TEN. If you've had a medication-related form of this condition, you are at risk of a recurrence if you use that drug again.
A family history of SJS/TEN. If a first-degree relative, such as a parent or sibling, has had SJS/TEN, you may be more susceptible to developing it too.
Genetic factors. Having certain genetic variations puts you at increased risk of SJS/TEN, especially if you're also taking drugs for seizures, gout or mental illness.
People at highest risk of TEN complications are those over age 70 and those who have liver cirrhosis or spreading (metastatic) cancer. Complications of TEN include:
Blood infection (sepsis). Sepsis occurs when bacteria from an infection enter your bloodstream and spread throughout your body. Sepsis is a rapidly progressing, life-threatening condition that can cause shock and organ failure.
Lung involvement. This can cause coughing, difficulty breathing and, with severe disease, acute respiratory failure.
Visual impairment. TEN can cause eye problems, such as dry eye, ingrown eyelashes, corneal scarring and, rarely, blindness.
Permanent skin damage. After recovering from TEN, your skin may have bumps, scars and discoloration. Lasting skin problems might cause your hair to fall out, and your fingernails and toenails might not grow normally.
Vaginal sores. In women, TEN can cause sores in the tissues lining the vagina, leading to pain or, if left untreated, vaginal fusion.
Emotional distress. This condition causes distress and can have long-term psychological impact.
Signs and symptoms of tendinitis tend to occur at the point where a tendon attaches to a bone and typically include: Pain often described as a dull ache, especially when moving the affected limb or joint, Tenderness, Mild swelling.
Most cases of tendinitis respond to self-care measures. See your doctor if your signs and symptoms persist and interfere with your daily activities for more than a few days.
Although tendinitis can be caused by a sudden injury, the condition is much more likely to stem from the repetition of a particular movement over time. Most people develop tendinitis because their jobs or hobbies involve repetitive motions, which put stress on the tendons.
Using proper technique is especially important when performing repetitive sports movements or job-related activities. Improper technique can overload the tendon — which can occur, for instance, with tennis elbow — and lead to tendinitis.
Risk factors for developing tendinitis include age, working in particular jobs or participating in certain sports.
As people get older, their tendons become less flexible — which makes them easier to injure.
Tendinitis is more common in people whose jobs involve: Repetitive motions, Awkward positions, Frequent overhead reaching, Vibration, Forceful exertion.
You may be more likely to develop tendinitis if you participate in certain sports that involve repetitive motions, especially if your technique isn't optimal. This can occur with: Baseball, Basketball, Bowling, Golf, Running, Swimming, Tennis.
Without proper treatment, tendinitis can increase your risk of experiencing tendon rupture — a much more serious condition that may require surgery.
If tendon irritation persists for several weeks or months, a condition known as tendinosis may develop. This condition involves degenerative changes in the tendon, along with abnormal new blood vessel growth.
The pain associated with tennis elbow may radiate from the outside of your elbow into your forearm and wrist. Pain and weakness may make it difficult to: Shake hands or grip an object, Turn a doorknob, Hold a coffee cup.
Talk to your doctor if self-care steps such as rest, ice and use of over-the-counter pain relievers don't ease your elbow pain and tenderness.
Tennis elbow is an overuse and muscle strain injury. The cause is repeated contraction of the forearm muscles that you use to straighten and raise your hand and wrist. The repeated motions and stress to the tissue may result in a series of tiny tears in the tendons that attach the forearm muscles to the bony prominence at the outside of your elbow.
As the name suggests, playing tennis — especially repeated use of the backhand stroke with poor technique — is one possible cause of tennis elbow. However, many other common arm motions can cause tennis elbow, including: Using plumbing tools, Painting, Driving screws, Cutting up cooking ingredients, particularly meat, Repetitive computer mouse use.
Factors that may increase your risk of tennis elbow include:
Age. While tennis elbow affects people of all ages, it's most common in adults between the ages of 30 and 50.
Occupation. People who have jobs that involve repetitive motions of the wrist and arm are more likely to develop tennis elbow. Examples include plumbers, painters, carpenters, butchers and cooks.
Certain sports. Participating in racket sports increases your risk of tennis elbow, especially if you employ poor stroke technique.
Signs and symptoms of a tension headache include: Dull, aching head pain, Sensation of tightness or pressure across your forehead or on the sides and back of your head, Tenderness on your scalp, neck and shoulder muscles.
Tension headaches are divided into two main categories — episodic and chronic.
Episodic tension headaches can last from 30 minutes to a week. Frequent episodic tension headaches occur less than 15 days a month for at least three months. Frequent episodic tension headaches may become chronic.
This type of tension headache lasts hours and may be continuous. If your headaches occur 15 or more days a month for at least three months, they're considered chronic.
Tension headaches can be difficult to distinguish from migraines. Plus, if you have frequent episodic tension headaches, you can also have migraines.
Unlike some forms of migraine, tension headaches usually aren't associated with visual disturbances, nausea or vomiting. Although physical activity typically aggravates migraine pain, it doesn't make tension headache pain worse. An increased sensitivity to either light or sound can occur with a tension headache, but these aren't common symptoms.
If tension headaches disrupt your life or you need to take medication for your headaches more than twice a week, see your doctor.
Even if you have a history of headaches, see your doctor if the pattern changes or your headaches suddenly feel different. Occasionally, headaches may indicate a serious medical condition, such as a brain tumor or rupture of a weakened blood vessel (aneurysm).
If you have any of these signs or symptoms, seek emergency care: Abrupt, severe headache, Headache with a fever, stiff neck, mental confusion, seizures, double vision, weakness, numbness or speaking difficulties, Headache after a head injury, especially if the headache gets worse.
The cause of tension headaches is not known. Experts used to think tension headaches stemmed from muscle contractions in the face, neck and scalp, perhaps as a result of heightened emotions, tension or stress. But research suggests muscle contraction isn't the cause.
The most common theory supports a heightened sensitivity to pain in people who have tension headaches. Increased muscle tenderness, a common symptom of tension headaches, may result from a sensitized pain system.
Stress is the most commonly reported trigger for tension headaches.
Because tension headaches are so common, their effect on job productivity and overall quality of life is considerable, particularly if they're chronic. The frequent pain may render you unable to attend activities. You might need to stay home from work, or if you do go to your job, your ability to function is impaired.
Signs and symptoms of testicular cancer include: A lump or enlargement in either testicle, A feeling of heaviness in the scrotum, A dull ache in the abdomen or groin, A sudden collection of fluid in the scrotum, Pain or discomfort in a testicle or the scrotum, Enlargement or tenderness of the breasts, Back pain.
Cancer usually affects only one testicle.
See your doctor if you detect any pain, swelling or lumps in your testicles or groin area, especially if these signs and symptoms last longer than two weeks.
It's not clear what causes testicular cancer in most cases.
Doctors know that testicular cancer occurs when healthy cells in a testicle become altered. Healthy cells grow and divide in an orderly way to keep your body functioning normally. But sometimes some cells develop abnormalities, causing this growth to get out of control — these cancer cells continue dividing even when new cells aren't needed. The accumulating cells form a mass in the testicle.
Nearly all testicular cancers begin in the germ cells — the cells in the testicles that produce immature sperm. What causes germ cells to become abnormal and develop into cancer isn't known.
Factors that may increase your risk of testicular cancer include:
An undescended testicle (cryptorchidism). The testes form in the abdominal area during fetal development and usually descend into the scrotum before birth. Men who have a testicle that never descended are at greater risk of testicular cancer than are men whose testicles descended normally. The risk remains elevated even if the testicle has been surgically relocated to the scrotum.
Still, the majority of men who develop testicular cancer don't have a history of undescended testicles.
Abnormal testicle development. Conditions that cause testicles to develop abnormally, such as Klinefelter syndrome, may increase your risk of testicular cancer.
Family history. If family members have had testicular cancer, you may have an increased risk.
Age. Testicular cancer affects teens and younger men, particularly those between ages 15 and 35. However, it can occur at any age.
Race. Testicular cancer is more common in white men than in black men.
Signs and symptoms of testicular torsion include: Sudden, severe pain in the scrotum — the loose bag of skin under your penis that contains the testicles, Swelling of the scrotum, Abdominal pain, Nausea and vomiting, A testicle that's positioned higher than normal or at an unusual angle, Frequent urination, Fever.
Young boys who have testicular torsion typically wake up due to scrotal pain in the middle of the night or early in the morning.
Seek emergency care for sudden or severe testicle pain. Prompt treatment can prevent severe damage or loss of your testicle if you have testicular torsion.
You also need to seek prompt medical help if you've had sudden testicle pain that goes away without treatment. This can occur when a testicle twists and then untwists on its own (intermittent torsion and detorsion). Surgery is frequently needed to prevent the problem from happening again.
Testicular torsion occurs when the testicle rotates on the spermatic cord, which brings blood to the testicle from the abdomen. If the testicle rotates several times, blood flow to it can be entirely blocked, causing damage more quickly.
It's not clear why testicular torsion occurs. Most males who get testicular torsion have an inherited trait that allows the testicle to rotate freely inside the scrotum. This inherited condition often affects both testicles. But not every male with the trait will have testicular torsion.
Testicular torsion often occurs several hours after vigorous activity, after a minor injury to the testicles or while sleeping. Cold temperature or rapid growth of the testicle during puberty also might play a role.
Age. Testicular torsion is most common between ages 12 and 18.
Previous testicular torsion. If you've had testicular pain that went away without treatment (intermittent torsion and detorsion), it's likely to occur again. The more frequent the bouts of pain, the higher the risk of testicular damage.
Family history of testicular torsion. The condition can run in families.
Testicular torsion can cause the following complications:
Damage to or death of the testicle. When testicular torsion is not treated for several hours, blocked blood flow can cause permanent damage to the testicle. If the testicle is badly damaged, it has to be surgically removed.
Inability to father children. In some cases, damage or loss of a testicle affects a man's ability to father children.
Signs and symptoms of tetanus appear anytime from a few days to several weeks after tetanus bacteria enter your body through a wound. The average incubation period is seven to 10 days.
Common signs and symptoms of tetanus include: Spasms and stiffness in your jaw muscles (trismus), Stiffness of your neck muscles, Difficulty swallowing, Stiffness of your abdominal muscles, Painful body spasms lasting for several minutes, typically triggered by minor occurrences, such as a draft, loud noise, physical touch or light.
Possible other signs and symptoms include: Fever, Sweating, Elevated blood pressure, Rapid heart rate.
See your doctor for a tetanus booster shot if you haven't had a booster shot within the past 10 years, or you have a deep or dirty wound and you haven't had a booster shot in five years. If you aren't sure of when you received your last booster, get a booster.
Tetanus is caused by a toxin made by spores of bacteria, Clostridium tetani, found in soil, dust and animal feces. When the spores enter a deep flesh wound, they grow into bacteria that can produce a powerful toxin, tetanospasmin. The toxin impairs the nerves that control your muscles (motor neurons). The toxin can cause muscle stiffness and spasms — the major signs and symptoms of tetanus.
Nearly all cases of tetanus occur in people who have never been vaccinated or in adults who haven't kept up with their 10-year booster shots. You can't catch tetanus from a person who has it.
The following increase your likelihood of getting tetanus: Failure to get vaccinated or to keep up to date with booster shots against tetanus, An injury that lets tetanus spores into the wound, A foreign body, such as a nail or splinter.
Tetanus cases have developed from the following: Puncture wounds — including from splinters, body piercings, tattoos and injection drugs, Gunshot wounds, Compound fractures, Burns, Surgical wounds, Injection drug use, Animal or insect bites, Infected foot ulcers, Dental infections, Infected umbilical stumps in newborns born of inadequately vaccinated mothers.
Once tetanus toxin has bonded to your nerve endings it is impossible to remove. Complete recovery from a tetanus infection requires new nerve endings to grow, which can take up to several months.
Complications of tetanus infection may include:
Broken bones. The severity of spasms may cause the spine and other bones to break.
Blockage of a lung artery (pulmonary embolism). A blood clot that has traveled from elsewhere in your body can block the main artery of the lung or one of its branches.
Death. Severe tetanus-induced (tetanic) muscle spasms can interfere with or stop your breathing. Respiratory failure is the most common cause of death. Lack of oxygen may also induce cardiac arrest and death. Pneumonia is another cause of death.
Tetralogy of Fallot symptoms vary, depending on the extent of obstruction of blood flow out of the right ventricle and into the lungs. Signs and symptoms may include: A bluish coloration of the skin caused by blood low in oxygen (cyanosis), Shortness of breath and rapid breathing, especially during feeding or exercise, Loss of consciousness (fainting), Clubbing of fingers and toes — an abnormal, rounded shape of the nail bed, Poor weight gain, Tiring easily during play or exercise, Irritability, Prolonged crying, A heart murmur.
Sometimes, babies who have tetralogy of Fallot will suddenly develop deep blue skin, nails and lips after crying or feeding, or when agitated.
These episodes are called tet spells and are caused by a rapid drop in the amount of oxygen in the blood. Tet spells are most common in young infants, around 2 to 4 months old. Toddlers or older children might instinctively squat when they're short of breath. Squatting increases blood flow to the lungs.
Seek medical help if you notice that your baby has the following symptoms: Difficulty breathing, Bluish discoloration of the skin, Passing out or seizures, Weakness, Unusual irritability.
If your baby becomes blue (cyanotic), place your baby on his or her side and pull your baby's knees up to his or her chest. This helps increase blood flow to the lungs. Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.
Tetralogy of Fallot occurs during fetal growth, when the baby's heart is developing. While factors such as poor maternal nutrition, viral illness or genetic disorders might increase the risk of this condition, in most cases the cause of tetralogy of Fallot is unknown.
The four abnormalities that make up the tetralogy of Fallot include:
Pulmonary valve stenosis. Pulmonary valve stenosis is a narrowing of the pulmonary valve — the valve that separates the lower right chamber of the heart (right ventricle) from the main blood vessel leading to the lungs (pulmonary artery).
Narrowing (constriction) of the pulmonary valve reduces blood flow to the lungs. The narrowing might also affect the muscle beneath the pulmonary valve. In some severe cases, the pulmonary valve doesn't form properly (pulmonary atresia) and causes reduced blood flow to the lungs.
Ventricular septal defect. A ventricular septal defect is a hole (defect) in the wall (septum) that separates the two lower chambers of the heart — the left and right ventricles. The hole allows deoxygenated blood in the right ventricle — blood that has circulated through the body and is returning to the lungs to replenish its oxygen supply — to flow into the left ventricle and mix with oxygenated blood fresh from the lungs.
Blood from the left ventricle also flows back to the right ventricle in an inefficient manner. This ability for blood to flow through the ventricular septal defect reduces the supply of oxygenated blood to the body and eventually can weaken the heart.
Overriding aorta. Normally the aorta — the main artery leading out to the body — branches off the left ventricle. In tetralogy of Fallot, the aorta is shifted slightly to the right and lies directly above the ventricular septal defect.
In this position the aorta receives blood from both the right and left ventricles, mixing the oxygen-poor blood from the right ventricle with the oxygen-rich blood from the left ventricle.
Right ventricular hypertrophy. When the heart's pumping action is overworked, it causes the muscular wall of the right ventricle to thicken. Over time this might cause the heart to stiffen, become weak and eventually fail.
Some children or adults who have tetralogy of Fallot may have other heart defects, such as a hole between the heart's upper chambers (atrial septal defect), a right aortic arch or abnormalities of the coronary arteries.
While the exact cause of tetralogy of Fallot is unknown, various factors might increase the risk of a baby being born with this condition. These risk factors include: A viral illness during pregnancy, such as rubella (German measles), Alcoholism during pregnancy, Poor nutrition during pregnancy, A mother older than age 40, A parent who has tetralogy of Fallot, The presence of Down syndrome or DiGeorge syndrome.
All babies who have tetralogy of Fallot need corrective surgery. Without treatment, your baby might not grow and develop properly.
Your baby may also be at an increased risk of serious complications, such as infective endocarditis — an infection of the inner lining of the heart or heart valve caused by a bacterial infection.
Untreated cases of tetralogy of Fallot usually develop severe complications over time, which might result in death or disability by early adulthood.
There are several types of thalassemia. The signs and symptoms you have depend on the type and severity of your condition.
Thalassemia signs and symptoms can include: Fatigue, Weakness, Pale or yellowish skin, Facial bone deformities, Slow growth, Abdominal swelling, Dark urine.
Some babies show signs and symptoms of thalassemia at birth; others develop them during the first two years of life. Some people who have only one affected hemoglobin gene don't have thalassemia symptoms.
Make an appointment with your child's doctor for an evaluation if he or she has any of the signs or symptoms of thalassemia.
Thalassemia is caused by mutations in the DNA of cells that make hemoglobin — the substance in red blood cells that carries oxygen throughout your body. The mutations associated with thalassemia are passed from parents to children.
Hemoglobin molecules are made of chains called alpha and beta chains that can be affected by mutations. In thalassemia, the production of either the alpha or beta chains are reduced, resulting in either alpha-thalassemia or beta-thalassemia.
In alpha-thalassemia, the severity of thalassemia you have depends on the number of gene mutations you inherit from your parents. The more mutated genes, the more severe your thalassemia.
In beta-thalassemia, the severity of thalassemia you have depends on which part of the hemoglobin molecule is affected.
Four genes are involved in making the alpha hemoglobin chain. You get two from each of your parents. If you inherit:
One mutated gene, you'll have no signs or symptoms of thalassemia. But you are a carrier of the disease and can pass it on to your children.
Two mutated genes, your thalassemia signs and symptoms will be mild. This condition might be called alpha-thalassemia trait.
Three mutated genes, your signs and symptoms will be moderate to severe.
Inheriting four mutated genes is rare and usually results in stillbirth. Babies born with this condition often die shortly after birth or require lifelong transfusion therapy. In rare cases, a child born with this condition can be treated with transfusions and a stem cell transplant.
Two genes are involved in making the beta hemoglobin chain. You get one from each of your parents. If you inherit:
One mutated gene, you'll have mild signs and symptoms. This condition is called thalassemia minor or beta-thalassemia.
Two mutated genes, your signs and symptoms will be moderate to severe. This condition is called thalassemia major, or Cooley anemia.
Babies born with two defective beta hemoglobin genes usually are healthy at birth but develop signs and symptoms within the first two years of life. A milder form, called thalassemia intermedia, also can result from two mutated genes.
Factors that increase your risk of thalassemia include:
Family history of thalassemia. Thalassemia is passed from parents to children through mutated hemoglobin genes.
Certain ancestry. Thalassemia occurs most often in African Americans and in people of Mediterranean and Southeast Asian descent.
Possible complications of moderate to severe thalassemia include:
Iron overload. People with thalassemia can get too much iron in their bodies, either from the disease or from frequent blood transfusions. Too much iron can result in damage to your heart, liver and endocrine system, which includes hormone-producing glands that regulate processes throughout your body.
Infection. People with thalassemia have an increased risk of infection. This is especially true if you've had your spleen removed.
In cases of severe thalassemia, the following complications can occur:
Bone deformities. Thalassemia can make your bone marrow expand, which causes your bones to widen. This can result in abnormal bone structure, especially in your face and skull. Bone marrow expansion also makes bones thin and brittle, increasing the chance of broken bones.
Enlarged spleen. The spleen helps your body fight infection and filter unwanted material, such as old or damaged blood cells. Thalassemia is often accompanied by the destruction of a large number of red blood cells. This causes your spleen to enlarge and work harder than normal.
An enlarged spleen can make anemia worse, and it can reduce the life of transfused red blood cells. If your spleen grows too big, your doctor might suggest surgery to remove it.
Slowed growth rates. Anemia can both slow a child's growth and delay puberty.
Heart problems. Congestive heart failure and abnormal heart rhythms can be associated with severe thalassemia.
Thoracic aortic aneurysms often grow slowly and usually without symptoms, making them difficult to detect. Some aneurysms will never rupture. Many start small and stay small, although some expand over time. How quickly an aortic aneurysm may grow is difficult to predict.
As a thoracic aortic aneurysm grows, some people may notice: Tenderness or pain in the chest, Back pain, Hoarseness, Cough, Shortness of breath.
Aortic aneurysms can develop anywhere along the aorta, which runs from your heart through your chest and abdomen. When they occur in the chest, they're called thoracic aortic aneurysms. Aneurysms can occur anywhere in the thoracic aorta, including near the heart, in the aortic arch and in the lower part of the thoracic aorta.
Thoracic aortic aneurysms are less common than aneurysms that form in the lower part of your aorta (abdominal aortic aneurysms). An aneurysm can also occur in between the upper and lower parts of your aorta. This type of aneurysm is called a thoracoabdominal aneurysm.
Most people with aortic aneurysms don't have symptoms unless a tear or rupture occurs. A dissection or rupture is a medical emergency. Call 911 or your local emergency number for immediate assistance.
If an aneurysm ruptures or one or more layers of the artery wall tears, you may feel: Sharp, sudden pain in the upper back that radiates downward, Pain in your chest, jaw, neck or arms, Difficulty breathing.
If you have a family history of aortic aneurysm, Marfan syndrome or another connective tissue disease, or a bicuspid aortic valve, your doctor may recommend regular ultrasound or radiology testing such as CT scans or MRI exams to screen for aortic aneurysm.
Factors that can contribute to an aneurysm's development include:
Hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis). As plaque builds up on your artery walls, they become less flexible, and the additional pressure can cause them to weaken and bulge. High blood pressure and high cholesterol are risk factors for hardening of the arteries. This is more common in older people.
Genetic conditions. Aortic aneurysms in younger people often have a genetic cause. People who are born with Marfan syndrome, a genetic condition that affects the connective tissue in the body, are particularly at risk of a thoracic aortic aneurysm because they may have weakness in the aortic wall.
Marfan syndrome generally causes distinct physical traits, including tall stature, very long arms, a deformed breastbone and eye problems.
Other family-related disorders can cause an aortic aneurysm, including vascular Ehlers-Danlos, Loeys-Dietz and Turner syndromes. Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome causes your skin, joints and connective tissue to be fragile and makes your skin stretch easily.
Other medical conditions. Inflammatory conditions, such as giant cell arteritis and Takayasu arteritis, are associated with thoracic aortic aneurysms.
Problems with your heart's aortic valve. Sometimes people who have problems with the valve that blood flows through as it leaves the heart (aortic valve) have an increased risk of thoracic aortic aneurysm. This is mainly true for people who were born with an aortic valve that has only two flaps instead of three (bicuspid aortic valve).
Untreated infection. Though rare, it's possible to develop a thoracic aortic aneurysm if you've had an untreated infection, such as syphilis or salmonella.
Traumatic injury. Rarely, some people who are injured in falls or motor vehicle crashes develop thoracic aortic aneurysms.
In aortic dissection, a tear occurs in the wall of the aorta. This causes bleeding into and along the aortic wall and, in some cases, completely outside the aorta (rupture).
An aortic dissection is a potential life-threatening emergency, depending on where in the aorta it occurs. It's important to treat an aortic aneurysm to try to prevent dissection. If dissection occurs, people can still be treated with surgery, but they will have a higher risk of complications.
Thoracic aortic aneurysm risk factors include:
Age. Thoracic aortic aneurysms occur most often in people age 65 and older.
Tobacco use. Tobacco use is a strong risk factor for the development of an aortic aneurysm.
High blood pressure. Increased blood pressure damages the blood vessels in the body, raising your chances of developing an aneurysm.
Buildup of plaques in your arteries. The buildup of fat and other substances that can damage the lining of a blood vessel increases your risk of an aneurysm. This is a more common risk in older people.
Family history. People who have a family history of aortic aneurysm are at increased risk of having one. A family history means you may develop aneurysms at a younger age and you're at higher risk of rupture. This is a primary risk factor in younger people.
Marfan syndrome and related conditions. If you have Marfan syndrome or a related condition, such as Loeys-Dietz syndrome or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, you have a significantly higher risk of a thoracic aortic aneurysm and aortic or other blood vessel dissection or rupture.
Bicuspid aortic valve. Nearly half of those who have an aortic valve with two cusps instead of three may develop an aortic aneurysm.
Tears in the wall of the aorta and rupture of the aorta are the main complications of thoracic aortic aneurysm. A ruptured aortic aneurysm can lead to life-threatening internal bleeding. In general, the larger the aneurysm, the greater the risk of rupture.
Signs and symptoms that your thoracic aortic aneurysm has burst include: Sudden, intense and persistent chest or back pain, Pain that radiates to your back, Trouble breathing, Low blood pressure, Loss of consciousness, Shortness of breath, Trouble swallowing, Weakness or paralysis of one side of the body, difficulty speaking, or other signs of a stroke.
Another complication of aortic aneurysms is the risk of blood clots. Small blood clots can develop in the area of the aortic aneurysm. If a blood clot breaks loose from the inside wall of an aneurysm, it can block a blood vessel elsewhere in your body, possibly causing serious complications.
There are a number of types of thoracic outlet syndrome, including:
Neurogenic (neurological) thoracic outlet syndrome. This most common type of thoracic outlet syndrome is characterized by compression of the brachial plexus. The brachial plexus is a network of nerves that come from your spinal cord and control muscle movements and sensation in your shoulder, arm and hand.
Vascular thoracic outlet syndrome. This type of thoracic outlet syndrome occurs when one or more of the veins (venous thoracic outlet syndrome) or arteries (arterial thoracic outlet syndrome) under the collarbone (clavicle) are compressed.
Nonspecific-type thoracic outlet syndrome. This type is also called disputed thoracic outlet syndrome. Some doctors don't believe it exists, while others say it's a common disorder. People with nonspecific-type thoracic outlet syndrome have chronic pain in the area of the thoracic outlet that worsens with activity, but a specific cause of the pain can't be determined.
Thoracic outlet syndrome symptoms can vary, depending on which structures are compressed. When nerves are compressed, signs and symptoms of neurological thoracic outlet syndrome include: Muscle wasting in the fleshy base of your thumb (Gilliatt-Sumner hand), Numbness or tingling in your arm or fingers, Pain or aches in your neck, shoulder or hand, Weakening grip.
Signs and symptoms of vascular thoracic outlet syndrome can include: Discoloration of your hand (bluish color), Arm pain and swelling, possibly due to blood clots, Blood clot in veins or arteries in the upper area of your body, Lack of color (pallor) in one or more of your fingers or your entire hand, Weak or no pulse in the affected arm, Cold fingers, hands or arms, Arm fatigue with activity, Numbness or tingling in your fingers, Weakness of arm or neck, Throbbing lump near your collarbone.
See your doctor if you consistently experience any of the signs and symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome.
In general, the cause of thoracic outlet syndrome is compression of the nerves or blood vessels in the thoracic outlet, just under your collarbone (clavicle). The cause of the compression varies and can include:
Anatomical defects. Inherited defects that are present at birth (congenital) may include an extra rib located above the first rib (cervical rib) or an abnormally tight fibrous band connecting your spine to your rib.
Poor posture. Drooping your shoulders or holding your head in a forward position can cause compression in the thoracic outlet area.
Trauma. A traumatic event, such as a car accident, can cause internal changes that then compress the nerves in the thoracic outlet. The onset of symptoms related to a traumatic accident often is delayed.
Repetitive activity. Doing the same thing repeatedly can, over time, wear on your body's tissue. You may notice symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome if your job requires you to repeat a movement continuously, such as typing on a computer, working on an assembly line or lifting things above your head, as you would if you were stocking shelves. Athletes, such as baseball pitchers and swimmers, also can develop thoracic outlet syndrome from years of repetitive movements.
Pressure on your joints. Obesity can put an undue amount of stress on your joints, as can carrying around an oversized bag or backpack.
Pregnancy. Because joints loosen during pregnancy, signs of thoracic outlet syndrome may first appear while you're pregnant.
There are several factors that seem to increase the risk of thoracic outlet syndrome, including:
Sex. Females are far more likely to be diagnosed with thoracic outlet syndrome than are males.
Age. Thoracic outlet syndrome is more common in young adults, between 20 and 40 years old.
If your symptoms haven't been treated early, you may experience progressive nerve damage, and you may need surgery. Doctors recommend surgery to treat thoracic outlet syndrome only when other treatments haven't been effective. Surgery has higher risks than do other treatments and may not always treat your symptoms.
Signs and symptoms of throat cancer may include: A cough, Changes in your voice, such as hoarseness or not speaking clearly, Difficulty swallowing, Ear pain, A lump or sore that doesn't heal, A sore throat, Weight loss.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice any new signs and symptoms that are persistent. Most throat cancer symptoms aren't specific to cancer, so your doctor will likely investigate other more common causes first.
Throat cancer occurs when cells in your throat develop genetic mutations. These mutations cause cells to grow uncontrollably and continue living after healthy cells would normally die. The accumulating cells can form a tumor in your throat.
It's not clear what causes the mutation that causes throat cancer. But doctors have identified factors that may increase your risk.
Throat cancer is a general term that applies to cancer that develops in the throat (pharyngeal cancer) or in the voice box (laryngeal cancer). The throat and the voice box are closely connected, with the voice box located just below the throat.
Though most throat cancers involve the same types of cells, specific terms are used to differentiate the part of the throat where cancer originated.
Nasopharyngeal cancer begins in the nasopharynx — the part of your throat just behind your nose.
Oropharyngeal cancer begins in the oropharynx — the part of your throat right behind your mouth that includes your tonsils.
Hypopharyngeal cancer (laryngopharyngeal cancer) begins in the hypopharynx (laryngopharynx) — the lower part of your throat, just above your esophagus and windpipe.
Glottic cancer begins in the vocal cords.
Supraglottic cancer begins in the upper portion of the larynx and includes cancer that affects the epiglottis, which is a piece of cartilage that blocks food from going into your windpipe.
Subglottic cancer begins in the lower portion of your voice box, below your vocal cords.
Factors that can increase your risk of throat cancer include: Tobacco use, including smoking and chewing tobacco, Excessive alcohol use, A sexually transmitted virus called human papillomavirus (HPV), A diet lacking in fruits and vegetables, Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Thrombocytopenia signs and symptoms may include: Easy or excessive bruising (purpura), Superficial bleeding into the skin that appears as a rash of pinpoint-sized reddish-purple spots (petechiae), usually on the lower legs, Prolonged bleeding from cuts, Bleeding from your gums or nose, Blood in urine or stools, Unusually heavy menstrual flows, Fatigue, Enlarged spleen.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have signs of thrombocytopenia that worry you.
Bleeding that won't stop is a medical emergency. Seek immediate help for bleeding that can't be controlled by the usual first-aid techniques, such as applying pressure to the area.
Thrombocytopenia means you have fewer than 150,000 platelets per microliter of circulating blood. Because each platelet lives only about 10 days, your body normally renews your platelet supply continually by producing new platelets in your bone marrow.
Thrombocytopenia rarely is inherited; or it can be caused by a number of medications or conditions. Whatever the cause, circulating platelets are reduced by one or more of the following processes: trapping of platelets in the spleen, decreased platelet production or increased destruction of platelets.
The spleen is a small organ about the size of your fist situated just below your rib cage on the left side of your abdomen. Normally, your spleen works to fight infection and filter unwanted material from your blood. An enlarged spleen — which can be caused by a number of disorders — can harbor too many platelets, which decreases the number of platelets in circulation.
Platelets are produced in your bone marrow. Factors that can decrease platelet production include: Leukemia and other cancers, Some types of anemia, Viral infections, such as hepatitis C or HIV, Chemotherapy drugs and radiation therapy, Heavy alcohol consumption.
Some conditions can cause your body to use up or destroy platelets faster than they're produced, leading to a shortage of platelets in your bloodstream. Examples of such conditions include:
Pregnancy. Thrombocytopenia caused by pregnancy is usually mild and improves soon after childbirth.
Immune thrombocytopenia. Autoimmune diseases, such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, cause this type. The body's immune system mistakenly attacks and destroys platelets. If the exact cause of this condition isn't known, it's called idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. This type more often affects children.
Bacteria in the blood. Severe bacterial infections involving the blood (bacteremia) can destroy platelets.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. This is a rare condition that occurs when small blood clots suddenly form throughout your body, using up large numbers of platelets.
Hemolytic uremic syndrome. This rare disorder causes a sharp drop in platelets, destruction of red blood cells and impairs kidney function.
Medications. Certain medications can reduce the number of platelets in your blood. Sometimes a drug confuses the immune system and causes it to destroy platelets. Examples include heparin, quinine, sulfa-containing antibiotics and anticonvulsants.
Dangerous internal bleeding can occur when your platelet count falls below 10,000 platelets per microliter. Though rare, severe thrombocytopenia can cause bleeding into the brain, which can be fatal.
People with thrombocytosis often don't have signs or symptoms. Signs and symptoms of reactive thrombocytosis, if they do occur, relate to the underlying condition.
People with essential thrombocythemia might have signs and symptoms related to blood clots and bleeding, including: Headache, Dizziness or lightheadedness, Chest pain, Weakness, Numbness or tingling of the hands and feet.
Because thrombocytosis isn't likely to cause symptoms, you probably won't know you have it unless a routine blood test reveals a higher than normal number of platelets. If that occurs, your doctor will try to determine the reason.
Bone marrow — spongy tissue inside your bones — contains stem cells that can become red blood cells, white blood cells or platelets. Platelets stick together, helping blood to form a clot that stops bleeding when you damage a blood vessel, such as when you cut yourself. Thrombocytosis occurs when your body produces too many platelets.
This is the more common type of thrombocytosis. It’s caused by an underlying medical problem, such as: Acute bleeding and blood loss, Cancer, Infections, Iron deficiency, Removal of your spleen, Hemolytic anemia — a type of anemia in which your body destroys red blood cells faster than it produces them, often due to certain blood diseases or autoimmune disorders, Inflammatory disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis or inflammatory bowel disease, Surgery or other type of trauma.
The cause of this disorder is unclear but it often appears to be connected to mutations in a variety of genes. Your bone marrow produces too many of the cells that form platelets and these platelets are often abnormal. This poses a much higher risk of clotting or bleeding complications than does reactive thrombocytosis.
Superficial thrombophlebitis signs and symptoms include: Warmth, tenderness and pain in the affected area, Redness and swelling.
Deep vein thrombosis signs and symptoms include: Pain, Swelling.
When a vein close to the surface of your skin is affected, you might see a red, hard cord just under the surface of your skin that's tender to the touch. When a deep vein in the leg is affected, your leg may become swollen, tender and painful.
See your doctor right away if you have a red, swollen or tender vein — especially if you have one or more risk factors for thrombophlebitis.
Call 911 or your local emergency number if: The vein swelling and pain are severe, You also have shortness of breath or chest pain, are coughing up blood, or have other symptoms that may indicate a blood clot traveling to your lungs  (pulmonary embolism).
Have someone take you to your doctor or emergency room, if possible. It might be difficult for you to drive, and it's helpful to have someone with you to help you remember the information you receive.
The cause of thrombophlebitis is a blood clot, which can form in your blood as a result of: An injury to a vein, An inherited blood-clotting disorder, Being immobile for long periods, such as during an injury or a hospital stay.
Your risk of thrombophlebitis increases if you: Are inactive for a prolonged period, either because you're confined to bed or you're traveling in a car or plane for a long period, Have varicose veins, which are a common cause of superficial thrombophlebitis, Have a pacemaker or have a thin, flexible tube (catheter) in a central vein, for treatment of a medical condition, which may irritate the blood vessel wall and decrease blood flow, Are pregnant or have just given birth, Use birth control pills or hormone replacement therapy, which can make your blood more likely to clot, Have a family history of a blood-clotting disorder or a tendency to form blood clots, Have had previous episodes of thrombophlebitis, Have had a stroke, Are older than 60, Are overweight or obese, Have cancer, Smoke.
If you have one or more risk factors, discuss prevention strategies with your doctor before taking long flights or road trips or if you're planning to have elective surgery, recovery from which will require you not to move much.
Complications from superficial thrombophlebitis are rare. However, if you develop DVT, the risk of serious complications increases. Complications might include:
Pulmonary embolism. If part of a deep vein clot becomes dislodged, it can travel to your lungs, where it can block an artery (embolism) and become potentially life-threatening.
Post-phlebetic syndrome. This condition, also known as post-thrombotic syndrome, can develop months or even years after you've had DVT. Post-phlebetic syndrome can cause lasting and possibly disabling pain, swelling, and a feeling of heaviness in the affected leg.
Pain is the first and most common symptom of thumb arthritis. Pain can occur at the base of your thumb when you grip, grasp or pinch an object, or use your thumb to apply force.
Other signs and symptoms might include: Swelling, stiffness and tenderness at the base of your thumb, Decreased strength when pinching or grasping objects, Decreased range of motion, Enlarged or bony appearance of the joint at the base of your thumb.
See your doctor if you have persistent swelling, stiffness or pain at the base of your thumb.
Thumb arthritis commonly occurs with aging. Previous trauma or injury to the thumb joint also can cause thumb arthritis.
In a normal thumb joint, cartilage covers the ends of the bones — acting as a cushion and allowing the bones to glide smoothly against each other. With thumb arthritis, the cartilage that covers the ends of the bones deteriorates, and its smooth surface roughens. The bones then rub against each other, resulting in friction and joint damage.
The damage to the joint might result in growth of new bone along the sides of the existing bone (bone spurs), which can produce noticeable lumps on your thumb joint.
Factors that can increase your risk of thumb arthritis include:
Female sex.
Age above 40 years.
Obesity.
Certain hereditary conditions, such as joint ligament laxity and malformed joints.
Injuries to your thumb joint, such as fractures and sprains.
Diseases that change the normal structure and function of cartilage, such as rheumatoid arthritis. Although osteoarthritis is the most common cause of thumb arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis can also affect the CMC joint, usually to a lesser extent than other joints of the hand.
Activities and jobs that put high stress on the thumb joint.
Thunderclap headaches are dramatic. Symptoms include pain that: Strikes suddenly and severely, Peaks within 60 seconds, Can be accompanied by nausea or vomiting.
Thunderclap headaches might be accompanied by other signs and symptoms, such as: Altered mental state, Fever, Seizures.
These signs and symptoms might reflect the underlying cause.
Seek immediate medical attention for any headache that comes on suddenly and severely.
There's no obvious cause for some thunderclap headaches. In other cases, a variety of potentially life-threatening conditions might be responsible, including: Bleeding between the brain and membranes covering the brain (subarachnoid hemorrhage), A rupture of a blood vessel in the brain, A tear in the lining of an artery that supplies blood to the brain, Leaking of cerebrospinal fluid — usually due to a tear of the covering around a nerve root in the spine, Death of tissue or bleeding in the pituitary gland, A blood clot in the brain, Severe elevation in blood pressure (hypertensive crisis), Infection such as meningitis or encephalitis, Ischemic stroke.
Thyroid cancer typically doesn't cause any signs or symptoms early in the disease. As thyroid cancer grows, it may cause: A lump (nodule) that can be felt through the skin on your neck, Changes to your voice, including increasing hoarseness, Difficulty swallowing, Pain in your neck and throat, Swollen lymph nodes in your neck.
If you experience any signs or symptoms that worry you, make an appointment with your doctor.
It's not clear what causes thyroid cancer.
Thyroid cancer occurs when cells in your thyroid undergo genetic changes (mutations). The mutations allow the cells to grow and multiply rapidly. The cells also lose the ability to die, as normal cells would. The accumulating abnormal thyroid cells form a tumor. The abnormal cells can invade nearby tissue and can spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.
Thyroid cancer is classified into types based on the kinds of cells found in the tumor. Your type is determined when a sample of tissue from your cancer is examined under a microscope. The type of thyroid cancer is considered in determining your treatment and prognosis.
Types of thyroid cancer include:
Papillary thyroid cancer. The most common form of thyroid cancer, papillary thyroid cancer arises from follicular cells, which produce and store thyroid hormones. Papillary thyroid cancer can occur at any age, but most often it affects people ages 30 to 50. Doctors sometimes refer to papillary thyroid cancer and follicular thyroid cancer together as differentiated thyroid cancer.
Follicular thyroid cancer. Follicular thyroid cancer also arises from the follicular cells of the thyroid. It usually affects people older than age 50. Hurthle cell cancer is a rare and potentially more aggressive type of follicular thyroid cancer.
Anaplastic thyroid cancer. Anaplastic thyroid cancer is a rare type of thyroid cancer that begins in the follicular cells. It grows rapidly and is very difficult to treat. Anaplastic thyroid cancer typically occurs in adults age 60 and older.
Medullary thyroid cancer. Medullary thyroid cancer begins in thyroid cells called C cells, which produce the hormone calcitonin. Elevated levels of calcitonin in the blood can indicate medullary thyroid cancer at a very early stage. Certain genetic syndromes increase the risk of medullary thyroid cancer, although this genetic link is uncommon.
Other rare types. Other very rare types of cancer that start in the thyroid include thyroid lymphoma, which begins in the immune system cells of the thyroid, and thyroid sarcoma, which begins in the connective tissue cells of the thyroid.
Factors that may increase the risk of thyroid cancer include:
Female sex. Thyroid cancer occurs more often in women than in men.
Exposure to high levels of radiation. Radiation therapy treatments to the head and neck increase the risk of thyroid cancer.
Certain inherited genetic syndromes. Genetic syndromes that increase the risk of thyroid cancer include familial medullary thyroid cancer, multiple endocrine neoplasia, Cowden's syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis.
Despite treatment, thyroid cancer can return, even if you've had your thyroid removed. This could happen if microscopic cancer cells spread beyond the thyroid before it's removed.
Thyroid cancer may recur in: Lymph nodes in the neck, Small pieces of thyroid tissue left behind during surgery, Other areas of the body, such as the lungs and bones.
Thyroid cancer that recurs can be treated. Your doctor may recommend periodic blood tests or thyroid scans to check for signs of a thyroid cancer recurrence.
Most thyroid nodules don't cause signs or symptoms. But occasionally some nodules become so large that they can: Be felt, Be seen, often as a swelling at the base of your neck, Press on your windpipe or esophagus, causing shortness of breath or difficulty swallowing.
In some cases, thyroid nodules produce additional thyroxine, a hormone secreted by your thyroid gland. The extra thyroxine can cause symptoms of an overproduction of thyroid hormones (hyperthyroidism), such as: Unexplained weight loss, Increased sweating, Tremor, Nervousness, Rapid or irregular heartbeat.
Only a small number of thyroid nodules are cancerous. But determining which nodules are cancerous can't be done by evaluating your symptoms alone. Most cancerous thyroid nodules are slow growing and may be small when your doctor discovers them. Aggressive thyroid cancers are rare with nodules that may be large, firm, fixed and rapid growing.
Although most thyroid nodules are noncancerous and don't cause problems, ask your doctor to evaluate any unusual swelling in your neck, especially if you have trouble breathing or swallowing. It's important to evaluate the possibility of cancer.
Seek medical care if you develop signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, such as: Sudden weight loss even though your appetite is normal or has increased, A pounding heart, Trouble sleeping, Muscle weakness, Nervousness or irritability.
Also see your doctor if you have signs and symptoms that may mean your thyroid gland isn't making enough thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism), which include: Feeling cold, Feeling tired more easily, Dry skin, Memory problems, Depression, Constipation.
Several conditions can cause nodules to develop in your thyroid gland, including:
Overgrowth of normal thyroid tissue. An overgrowth of normal thyroid tissue is sometimes referred to as a thyroid adenoma. It's unclear why this occurs, but it's not cancerous and isn't considered serious unless it causes bothersome symptoms from its size.
Some thyroid adenomas lead to hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid cyst. Fluid-filled cavities (cysts) in the thyroid most commonly result from degenerating thyroid adenomas. Often, solid components are mixed with fluid in thyroid cysts. Cysts are usually noncancerous, but they occasionally contain cancerous solid components.
Chronic inflammation of the thyroid. Hashimoto's disease, a thyroid disorder, can cause thyroid inflammation and result in enlarged nodules. This often is associated with hypothyroidism.
Multinodular goiter. The term goiter is used to describe any enlargement of the thyroid gland, which can be caused by iodine deficiency or a thyroid disorder. A multinodular goiter contains multiple distinct nodules within the goiter, but its cause is less clear.
Thyroid cancer. The chances that a nodule is cancerous are small. However, a nodule that is large and hard or causes pain or discomfort is more worrisome. You will likely want to have it checked by your doctor.
Certain factors increase your risk of thyroid cancer, such as a family history of thyroid or other endocrine cancers and having a history of radiation exposure from medical therapy or from nuclear fallout.
Iodine deficiency. Lack of iodine in your diet can sometimes cause your thyroid gland to develop thyroid nodules. But iodine deficiency is uncommon in the United States, where iodine is routinely added to table salt and other foods.
Complications associated with some thyroid nodules include:
Problems swallowing or breathing. Large nodules or a multinodular goiter can interfere with swallowing or breathing.
Hyperthyroidism. Problems can occur when a nodule or goiter produces thyroid hormone, leading to an excess amount of the hormone in the body. Hyperthyroidism can result in weight loss, muscle weakness, heat intolerance, and anxiousness or irritability.
Potential complications of hyperthyroidism include an irregular heartbeat, weak bones and thyrotoxic crisis, a rare but potentially life-threatening intensification of signs and symptoms that requires immediate medical care.
Problems related to thyroid nodule surgery. If your doctor recommends surgery to remove a nodule, you may need to take thyroid hormone replacement therapy for the rest of your life.
Tinea versicolor signs and symptoms include: Patches of skin discoloration, usually on the back, chest, neck and upper arms, which may appear lighter or darker than usual, Mild itching, Scaling.
See your doctor if: Your skin doesn't improve with self-care measures, The fungal infection returns, The patches cover large areas of your body.
The fungus that causes tinea versicolor can be found on healthy skin. It only starts causing problems when the fungus overgrows. A number of factors may trigger this growth, including: Hot, humid weather, Oily skin, Hormonal changes, Weakened immune system.
Tinnitus involves the sensation of hearing sound when no external sound is present. Tinnitus symptoms may include these types of phantom noises in your ears: Ringing, Buzzing, Roaring, Clicking, Hissing, Humming.
The phantom noise may vary in pitch from a low roar to a high squeal, and you may hear it in one or both ears. In some cases, the sound can be so loud it can interfere with your ability to concentrate or hear external sound. Tinnitus may be present all the time, or it may come and go.
There are two kinds of tinnitus.
Subjective tinnitus is tinnitus only you can hear. This is the most common type of tinnitus. It can be caused by ear problems in your outer, middle or inner ear. It can also be caused by problems with the hearing (auditory) nerves or the part of your brain that interprets nerve signals as sound (auditory pathways).
Objective tinnitus is tinnitus your doctor can hear when he or she does an examination. This rare type of tinnitus may be caused by a blood vessel problem, a middle ear bone condition or muscle contractions.
If you have tinnitus that bothers you, see your doctor. You develop tinnitus after an upper respiratory infection, such as a cold, and your tinnitus doesn't improve within a week.
You have tinnitus that occurs suddenly or without an apparent cause, You have hearing loss or dizziness with the tinnitus.
A number of health conditions can cause or worsen tinnitus. In many cases, an exact cause is never found.
A common cause of tinnitus is inner ear hair cell damage. Tiny, delicate hairs in your inner ear move in relation to the pressure of sound waves. This triggers cells to release an electrical signal through a nerve from your ear (auditory nerve) to your brain. Your brain interprets these signals as sound. If the hairs inside your inner ear are bent or broken, they can "leak" random electrical impulses to your brain, causing tinnitus.
Other causes of tinnitus include other ear problems, chronic health conditions, and injuries or conditions that affect the nerves in your ear or the hearing center in your brain.
In many people, tinnitus is caused by one of these conditions:
Age-related hearing loss. For many people, hearing worsens with age, usually starting around age 60. Hearing loss can cause tinnitus. The medical term for this type of hearing loss is presbycusis.
Exposure to loud noise. Loud noises, such as those from heavy equipment, chain saws and firearms, are common sources of noise-related hearing loss. Portable music devices, such as MP3 players or iPods, also can cause noise-related hearing loss if played loudly for long periods. Tinnitus caused by short-term exposure, such as attending a loud concert, usually goes away; both short- and long-term exposure to loud sound can cause permanent damage.
Earwax blockage. Earwax protects your ear canal by trapping dirt and slowing the growth of bacteria. When too much earwax accumulates, it becomes too hard to wash away naturally, causing hearing loss or irritation of the eardrum, which can lead to tinnitus.
Ear bone changes. Stiffening of the bones in your middle ear (otosclerosis) may affect your hearing and cause tinnitus. This condition, caused by abnormal bone growth, tends to run in families.
Some causes of tinnitus are less common, including:
Meniere's disease. Tinnitus can be an early indicator of Meniere's disease, an inner ear disorder that may be caused by abnormal inner ear fluid pressure.
TMJ disorders. Problems with the temporomandibular joint, the joint on each side of your head in front of your ears, where your lower jawbone meets your skull, can cause tinnitus.
Head injuries or neck injuries. Head or neck trauma can affect the inner ear, hearing nerves or brain function linked to hearing. Such injuries generally cause tinnitus in only one ear.
Acoustic neuroma. This noncancerous (benign) tumor develops on the cranial nerve that runs from your brain to your inner ear and controls balance and hearing. Also called vestibular schwannoma, this condition generally causes tinnitus in only one ear.
Eustachian tube dysfunction. In this condition, the tube in your ear connecting the middle ear to your upper throat remains expanded all the time, which can make your ear feel full. Loss of a significant amount of weight, pregnancy and radiation therapy can sometimes cause this type of dysfunction.
Muscle spasms in the inner ear. Muscles in the inner ear can tense up (spasm), which can result in tinnitus, hearing loss and a feeling of fullness in the ear. This sometimes happens for no explainable reason, but can also be caused by neurologic diseases, including multiple sclerosis.
In rare cases, tinnitus is caused by a blood vessel disorder. This type of tinnitus is called pulsatile tinnitus. Causes include:
Atherosclerosis. With age and buildup of cholesterol and other deposits, major blood vessels close to your middle and inner ear lose some of their elasticity — the ability to flex or expand slightly with each heartbeat. That causes blood flow to become more forceful, making it easier for your ear to detect the beats. You can generally hear this type of tinnitus in both ears.
Head and neck tumors. A tumor that presses on blood vessels in your head or neck (vascular neoplasm) can cause tinnitus and other symptoms.
High blood pressure. Hypertension and factors that increase blood pressure, such as stress, alcohol and caffeine, can make tinnitus more noticeable.
Turbulent blood flow. Narrowing or kinking in a neck artery (carotid artery) or vein in your neck (jugular vein) can cause turbulent, irregular blood flow, leading to tinnitus.
Malformation of capillaries. A condition called arteriovenous malformation (AVM), abnormal connections between arteries and veins, can result in tinnitus. This type of tinnitus generally occurs in only one ear.
A number of medications may cause or worsen tinnitus. Generally, the higher the dose of these medications, the worse tinnitus becomes. Often the unwanted noise disappears when you stop using these drugs. Medications known to cause or worsen tinnitus include: Antibiotics, including polymyxin B, erythromycin, vancomycin (Vancocin HCL, Firvanq) and neomycin, Cancer medications, including methotrexate (Trexall) and cisplatin, Water pills (diuretics), such as bumetanide (Bumex), ethacrynic acid (Edecrin) or furosemide (Lasix), Quinine medications used for malaria or other health conditions, Certain antidepressants, which may worsen tinnitus, Aspirin taken in uncommonly high doses (usually 12 or more a day).
In addition, some herbal supplements can cause tinnitus, as can nicotine and caffeine.
Anyone can experience tinnitus, but these factors may increase your risk:
Loud noise exposure. Prolonged exposure to loud noise can damage the tiny sensory hair cells in your ear that transmit sound to your brain. People who work in noisy environments — such as factory and construction workers, musicians, and soldiers — are particularly at risk.
Age. As you age, the number of functioning nerve fibers in your ears declines, possibly causing hearing problems often associated with tinnitus.
Sex. Men are more likely to experience tinnitus.
Smoking. Smokers have a higher risk of developing tinnitus.
Cardiovascular problems. Conditions that affect your blood flow, such as high blood pressure or narrowed arteries (atherosclerosis), can increase your risk of tinnitus.
Tinnitus can significantly affect quality of life. Although it affects people differently, if you have tinnitus, you may also experience: Fatigue, Stress, Sleep problems, Trouble concentrating, Memory problems, Depression, Anxiety and irritability.
Treating these linked conditions may not affect tinnitus directly, but it can help you feel better.
Signs and symptoms of TMJ disorders may include: Pain or tenderness of your jaw, Pain in one or both of the temporomandibular joints, Aching pain in and around your ear, Difficulty chewing or pain while chewing, Aching facial pain, Locking of the joint, making it difficult to open or close your mouth.
TMJ disorders can also cause a clicking sound or grating sensation when you open your mouth or chew. But if there's no pain or limitation of movement associated with your jaw clicking, you probably don't need treatment for a TMJ disorder.
Seek medical attention if you have persistent pain or tenderness in your jaw, or if you can't open or close your jaw completely. Your doctor, your dentist or a TMJ specialist can discuss possible causes and treatments for your problem.
The temporomandibular joint combines a hinge action with sliding motions. The parts of the bones that interact in the joint are covered with cartilage and are separated by a small shock-absorbing disk, which normally keeps the movement smooth.
Painful TMJ disorders can occur if: The disk erodes or moves out of its proper alignment, The joint's cartilage is damaged by arthritis, The joint is damaged by a blow or other impact.
In many cases, however, the cause of TMJ disorders isn't clear.
Factors that may increase the risk of developing TMJ disorders include: Various types of arthritis, such as rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, Jaw injury, Long-term (chronic) grinding or clenching of teeth, Certain connective tissue diseases that cause problems that may affect the temporomandibular joint.
Toe walking is walking on the toes or the ball of the foot.
If your child is still toe walking after age 2, talk to your doctor about it. Make an appointment sooner if your child also has tight leg muscles, stiffness in the Achilles tendon or a lack of muscle coordination.
Typically, toe walking is a habit that develops when a child learns to walk. In a few cases, toe walking is caused by an underlying condition, such as:
A short Achilles tendon. This tendon links the lower leg muscles to the back of the heel bone. If it's too short, it can prevent the heel from touching the ground.
Cerebral palsy. Toe walking can be caused by a disorder of movement, muscle tone or posture caused by injury or abnormal development in the parts of the immature brain that control muscle function.
Muscular dystrophy. Toe walking sometimes occurs in this genetic disease in which muscle fibers are unusually prone to damage and weaken over time. This diagnosis might be more likely if your child initially walked normally before starting to toe walk.
Autism. Toe walking has been linked to autism spectrum disorders, which affect a child's ability to communicate and interact with others.
Toe walking out of habit, also known as idiopathic toe walking, sometimes runs in families.
Persistent toe walking can increase a child's risk of falling. It can also result in a social stigma.
Signs and symptoms of tongue-tie include: Difficulty lifting the tongue to the upper teeth or moving the tongue from side to side, Trouble sticking out the tongue past the lower front teeth, A tongue that appears notched or heart shaped when stuck out.
See a doctor if: Your baby has signs of tongue-tie that cause problems, such as having trouble breast-feeding, A speech-language pathologist thinks your child's speech is affected by tongue-tie, Your older child complains of tongue problems that interfere with eating, speaking or reaching the back teeth, You're bothered by your own symptoms of tongue-tie.
Typically, the lingual frenulum separates before birth, allowing the tongue free range of motion. With tongue-tie, the lingual frenulum remains attached to the bottom of the tongue. Why this happens is largely unknown, although some cases of tongue-tie have been associated with certain genetic factors.
Although tongue-tie can affect anyone, it's more common in boys than girls. Tongue-tie sometimes runs in families.
Tongue-tie can affect a baby's oral development, as well as the way he or she eats, speaks and swallows.
For example, tongue-tie can lead to:
Breast-feeding problems. Breast-feeding requires a baby to keep his or her tongue over the lower gum while sucking. If unable to move the tongue or keep it in the right position, the baby might chew instead of suck on the nipple. This can cause significant nipple pain and interfere with a baby's ability to get breast milk. Ultimately, poor breast-feeding can lead to inadequate nutrition and failure to thrive.
Speech difficulties. Tongue-tie can interfere with the ability to make certain sounds — such as "t," "d," "z," "s," "th," "r" and "l."
Poor oral hygiene. For an older child or adult, tongue-tie can make it difficult to sweep food debris from the teeth. This can contribute to tooth decay and inflammation of the gums (gingivitis). Tongue-tie can also lead to the formation of a gap or space between the two bottom front teeth.
Challenges with other oral activities. Tongue-tie can interfere with activities such as licking an ice cream cone, licking the lips, kissing or playing a wind instrument.
Tonsil cancer symptoms include difficulty swallowing and a sensation that something is caught in your throat. Tonsil cancer happens when abnormal cells form in the two oval-shaped pads in the back of your mouth, called tonsils.
Tonsillitis most commonly affects children between preschool ages and the mid-teenage years. Common signs and symptoms of tonsillitis include: Red, swollen tonsils, White or yellow coating or patches on the tonsils, Sore throat, Difficult or painful swallowing, Fever, Enlarged, tender glands (lymph nodes) in the neck, A scratchy, muffled or throaty voice, Bad breath, Stomachache, particularly in younger children, Stiff neck, Headache.
In young children who are unable to describe how they feel, signs of tonsillitis may include: Drooling due to difficult or painful swallowing, Refusal to eat, Unusual fussiness.
It's important to get an accurate diagnosis if your child has symptoms that may indicate tonsillitis.
Call your doctor if your child is experiencing: A sore throat that doesn't go away within 24 to 48 hours, Painful or difficult swallowing, Extreme weakness, fatigue or fussiness.
Get immediate care if your child has any of these symptoms: Difficulty breathing, Extreme difficulty swallowing, Drooling.
Tonsillitis is most often caused by common viruses, but bacterial infections can also be the cause.
The most common bacterium causing tonsillitis is Streptococcus pyogenes (group A streptococcus), the bacterium that causes strep throat. Other strains of strep and other bacteria also may cause tonsillitis.
The tonsils are the immune system's first line of defense against bacteria and viruses that enter your mouth. This function may make the tonsils particularly vulnerable to infection and inflammation. However, the tonsil's immune system function declines after puberty — a factor that may account for the rare cases of tonsillitis in adults.
Risk factors for tonsillitis include:
Young age. Tonsillitis most often occurs in children, but rarely in those younger than age 2. Tonsillitis caused by bacteria is most common in children ages 5 to 15, while viral tonsillitis is more common in younger children.
Frequent exposure to germs. School-age children are in close contact with their peers and frequently exposed to viruses or bacteria that can cause tonsillitis.
Inflammation or swelling of the tonsils from frequent or ongoing (chronic) tonsillitis can cause complications such as: Difficulty breathing, Disrupted breathing during sleep (obstructive sleep apnea), Infection that spreads deep into surrounding tissue (tonsillar cellulitis), Infection that results in a collection of pus behind a tonsil (peritonsillar abscess).
If tonsillitis caused by group A streptococcus or another strain of streptococcal bacteria isn't treated, or if antibiotic treatment is incomplete, your child has an increased risk of rare disorders such as: Rheumatic fever, an inflammatory disorder that affects the heart, joints and other tissues, Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, an inflammatory disorder of the kidneys that results in inadequate removal of waste and excess fluids from blood.
Signs and symptoms of a tooth abscess include: Severe, persistent, throbbing toothache that can radiate to the jawbone, neck or ear, Sensitivity to hot and cold temperatures, Sensitivity to the pressure of chewing or biting, Fever, Swelling in your face or cheek, Tender, swollen lymph nodes under your jaw or in your neck, Sudden rush of foul-smelling and foul-tasting, salty fluid in your mouth and pain relief, if the abscess ruptures, Difficulty breathing or swallowing.
See your dentist promptly if you have any signs or symptoms of a tooth abscess.
If you have a fever and swelling in your face and you can't reach your dentist, go to an emergency room. Also go to the emergency room if you have trouble breathing or swallowing. These symptoms may indicate that the infection has spread deeper into your jaw and surrounding tissue or even to other areas of your body.
A periapical tooth abscess occurs when bacteria invade the dental pulp — the innermost part of the tooth that contains blood vessels, nerves and connective tissue.
Bacteria enter through either a dental cavity or a chip or crack in the tooth and spread all the way down to the root. The bacterial infection can cause swelling and inflammation at the tip of the root.
These factors may increase your risk of a tooth abscess:
Poor dental hygiene. Not taking proper care of your teeth and gums — such as not brushing your teeth twice a day and not flossing — can increase your risk of tooth decay, gum disease, tooth abscess, and other dental and mouth complications.
A diet high in sugar. Frequently eating and drinking foods rich in sugar, such as sweets and sodas, can contribute to dental cavities and turn into a tooth abscess.
Dry mouth. Having a dry mouth can increase your risk of tooth decay. Dry mouth is often due to the side effect of certain medications or aging issues.
A tooth abscess won't go away without treatment. If the abscess ruptures, the pain may decrease significantly — but you still need dental treatment. If the abscess doesn't drain, the infection may spread to your jaw and to other areas of your head and neck. You might even develop sepsis — a life-threatening infection that spreads throughout your body.
If you have a weakened immune system and you leave a tooth abscess untreated, your risk of a spreading infection increases even more.
If you've torn your meniscus, you might have the following signs and symptoms in your knee: A popping sensation, Swelling or stiffness, Pain, especially when twisting or rotating your knee, Difficulty straightening your knee fully, Feeling as though your knee is locked in place when you try to move it, Feeling of your knee giving way.
Contact your doctor if your knee is painful or swollen, or if you can't move your knee in the usual ways.
A torn meniscus can result from any activity that causes you to forcefully twist or rotate your knee, such as aggressive pivoting or sudden stops and turns. Even kneeling, deep squatting or lifting something heavy can sometimes lead to a torn meniscus.
In older adults, degenerative changes of the knee can contribute to a torn meniscus with little or no trauma.
Performing activities that involve aggressive twisting and pivoting of the knee puts you at risk of a torn meniscus. The risk is particularly high for athletes — especially those who participate in contact sports, such as football, or activities that involve pivoting, such as tennis or basketball.
Wear and tear on your knees as you age increases the risk of a torn meniscus. So does obesity.
A torn meniscus can lead to a feeling of your knee giving way, inability to move your knee normally or persistent knee pain. You might be more likely to develop osteoarthritis in the injured knee.
Tics — sudden, brief, intermittent movements or sounds — are the hallmark sign of Tourette syndrome. They can range from mild to severe. Severe symptoms might significantly interfere with communication, daily functioning and quality of life.
Tics are classified as:
Simple tics. These sudden, brief and repetitive tics involve a limited number of muscle groups.
Complex tics. These distinct, coordinated patterns of movements involve several muscle groups.
Tics can also involve movement (motor tics) or sounds (vocal tics). Motor tics usually begin before vocal tics do. But the spectrum of tics that people experience is diverse.
In addition, tics can: Vary in type, frequency and severity, Worsen if you're ill, stressed, anxious, tired or excited, Occur during sleep, Change over time, Worsen in the early teenage years and improve during the transition into adulthood.
Before the onset of motor or vocal tics, you'll likely experience an uncomfortable bodily sensation (premonitory urge) such as an itch, a tingle or tension. Expression of the tic brings relief. With great effort, some people with Tourette syndrome can temporarily stop or hold back a tic.
See your child's pediatrician if you notice your child displaying involuntary movements or sounds.
Not all tics indicate Tourette syndrome. Many children develop tics that go away on their own after a few weeks or months. But whenever a child shows unusual behavior, it's important to identify the cause and rule out serious health problems.
The exact cause of Tourette syndrome isn't known. It's a complex disorder likely caused by a combination of inherited (genetic) and environmental factors. Chemicals in the brain that transmit nerve impulses (neurotransmitters), including dopamine and serotonin, might play a role.
Risk factors for Tourette syndrome include:
Family history. Having a family history of Tourette syndrome or other tic disorders might increase the risk of developing Tourette syndrome.
Sex. Males are about three to four times more likely than females to develop Tourette syndrome.
People with Tourette syndrome often lead healthy, active lives. However, Tourette syndrome frequently involves behavioral and social challenges that can harm your self-image.
Conditions often associated with Tourette syndrome include: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), Autism spectrum disorder, Learning disabilities, Sleep disorders, Depression, Anxiety disorders, Pain related to tics, especially headaches, Anger-management problems.
Mild forms of toxic hepatitis may not cause any symptoms and may be detected only by blood tests. When signs and symptoms of toxic hepatitis occur, they may include: Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), Itching, Abdominal pain in the upper right portion of the abdomen, Fatigue, Loss of appetite, Nausea and vomiting, Rash, Fever, Weight loss, Dark or tea-colored urine.
See your doctor right away if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you.
Overdoses of some medications, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), can lead to liver failure. Get immediate medical care if you think an adult or a child has taken an overdose of acetaminophen. Signs and symptoms of a possible acetaminophen overdose include: Loss of appetite, Nausea and vomiting, Upper abdominal pain, Coma.
If you suspect an acetaminophen overdose, immediately call 911, your local emergency services or, in the United States, a poison control center at 800-222-1222. Do not wait for symptoms to develop. An acetaminophen overdose can be fatal but can be successfully treated if addressed early after ingestion.
Toxic hepatitis occurs when your liver develops inflammation because of exposure to a toxic substance. Toxic hepatitis may also develop when you take too much of a prescription or over-the-counter medication.
The liver normally removes and breaks down most drugs and chemicals from your bloodstream. Breaking down toxins creates byproducts that can damage the liver. Although the liver has a great capacity for regeneration, constant exposure to toxic substances can cause serious, sometimes irreversible harm.
Toxic hepatitis can be caused by:
Alcohol. Heavy drinking over many years can lead to alcoholic hepatitis — inflammation in the liver due to alcohol, which can lead to liver failure.
Over-the-counter pain relievers. Nonprescription pain relievers such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen (Aleve, others) can damage your liver, especially if taken frequently or combined with alcohol.
Prescription medications. Some medications linked to serious liver injury include the statin drugs used to treat high cholesterol, the combination drug amoxicillin-clavulanate (Augmentin), phenytoin (Dilantin, Phenytek), azathioprine (Azasan, Imuran), niacin (Niaspan), ketoconazole, certain antivirals and anabolic steroids. There are many others.
Herbs and supplements. Some herbs considered dangerous to the liver include aloe vera, black cohosh, cascara, chaparral, comfrey, kava and ephedra. There are many others. Children can develop liver damage if they mistake vitamin supplements for candy and take large doses.
Industrial chemicals. Chemicals you may be exposed to on the job can cause liver injury. Common chemicals that can cause liver damage include the dry cleaning solvent carbon tetrachloride, a substance called vinyl chloride (used to make plastics), the herbicide paraquat and a group of industrial chemicals called polychlorinated biphenyls.
Factors that may increase your risk of toxic hepatitis include:
Taking over-the-counter pain relievers or certain prescription drugs. Taking a medication or over-the-counter pain reliever that carries a risk of liver damage increases your risk of toxic hepatitis. This is especially true if you take multiple medications or take more than the recommended dose of medication.
Having a liver disease. Having a serious liver disorder such as cirrhosis or nonalcoholic fatty liver disease makes you much more susceptible to the effects of toxins.
Having hepatitis. Chronic infection with a hepatitis virus (hepatitis B, hepatitis C or one of the other — extremely rare — hepatitis viruses that may persist in the body) makes your liver more vulnerable.
Aging. As you age, your liver breaks down harmful substances more slowly. This means that toxins and their byproducts stay in your body longer.
Drinking alcohol. Drinking alcohol while taking medications or certain herbal supplements increases the risk of toxicity.
Being female. Because women seem to metabolize certain toxins more slowly than men do, their livers are exposed to higher blood concentrations of harmful substances for a longer time. This increases the risk of toxic hepatitis.
Having certain genetic mutations. Inheriting certain genetic mutations that affect the production and action of the liver enzymes that break down toxins may make you more susceptible to toxic hepatitis.
Working with industrial toxins. Working with certain industrial chemicals puts you at risk of toxic hepatitis.
The inflammation associated with toxic hepatitis can lead to liver damage and scarring. Over time, this scarring, called cirrhosis, makes it difficult for your liver to do its job. Eventually cirrhosis leads to liver failure. The only treatment for chronic liver failure is to replace your liver with a healthy one from a donor (liver transplant).
Possible signs and symptoms of toxic shock syndrome include: A sudden high fever, Low blood pressure, Vomiting or diarrhea, A rash resembling a sunburn, particularly on your palms and soles, Confusion, Muscle aches, Redness of your eyes, mouth and throat, Seizures, Headaches.
Call your doctor immediately if you have signs or symptoms of toxic shock syndrome. This is especially important if you've recently used tampons or if you have a skin or wound infection.
Most commonly, Staphylococcus aureus (staph) bacteria cause toxic shock syndrome. The syndrome can also be caused by group A streptococcus (strep) bacteria.
Toxic shock syndrome can affect anyone. About half the cases of toxic shock syndrome associated with staphylococci bacteria occur in women of menstruating age; the rest occur in older women, men and children. Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome occurs in people of all ages.
Toxic shock syndrome has been associated with: Having cuts or burns on your skin, Having had recent surgery, Using contraceptive sponges, diaphragms, superabsorbent tampons or menstrual cups, Having a viral infection, such as the flu or chickenpox.
Toxic shock syndrome can progress rapidly. Complications may include: Shock, Renal failure, Death.
Most healthy people who are infected with toxoplasmosis have no signs or symptoms and aren't aware that they're infected. Some people, however, develop signs and symptoms similar to those of the flu, including: Body aches, Swollen lymph nodes, Headache, Fever, Fatigue.
If you have HIV/AIDS, are receiving chemotherapy or have recently had an organ transplant, a previous toxoplasma infection may reactivate. In that case, you may develop more-severe signs and symptoms of infection, including: Headache, Confusion, Poor coordination, Seizures, Lung problems that may resemble tuberculosis or Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia, a common opportunistic infection that occurs in people with AIDS, Blurred vision caused by severe inflammation of your retina (ocular toxoplasmosis).
If you become infected for the first time just before or during your pregnancy, you can pass the infection to your baby (congenital toxoplasmosis), even if you don't have signs and symptoms yourself.
Your baby is most at risk of contracting toxoplasmosis if you become infected in the third trimester and least at risk if you become infected during the first trimester. On the other hand, the earlier in your pregnancy the infection occurs, the more serious the outcome for your baby.
Many early infections end in stillbirth or miscarriage. Infants who survive are likely to be born with serious problems, such as: Seizures, An enlarged liver and spleen, Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), Severe eye infections.
Only a small number of babies who have toxoplasmosis show signs of the disease at birth. Often, infants who are infected don't develop signs — which may include hearing loss, mental disability or serious eye infections — until their teens or later.
If you are living with HIV or AIDS or are pregnant or thinking of becoming pregnant, talk to your doctor about being tested if you think you may have been exposed to toxoplasmosis.
The signs and symptoms of severe toxoplasmosis — blurred vision, confusion, loss of coordination — require immediate medical care, particularly if your immune system has been weakened.
Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii) is a single-celled parasitic organism that can infect most animals and birds. Because T. gondii infectious organisms are excreted only in cat feces, wild and domestic cats are the parasite's ultimate host.
Although you can't "catch" toxoplasmosis from an infected child or adult, you can become infected if you:
Come into contact with cat feces that contain the parasite. You may accidentally ingest the parasites if you touch your mouth after gardening, cleaning a litter box or touching anything that has come in contact with infected cat feces. Cats who hunt or who are fed raw meat are most likely to harbor T. gondii.
Eat or drink contaminated food or water. Lamb, pork and venison are especially likely to be infected with T. gondii. Occasionally, unpasteurized dairy products also may contain the parasite. Water contaminated with T. gondii isn't common in the United States.
Use contaminated knives, cutting boards or other utensils. Kitchen utensils that come into contact with raw meat can harbor the parasites unless the utensils are washed thoroughly in hot, soapy water.
Eat unwashed fruits and vegetables. The surface of fruits and vegetables may contain the parasite. To be safe, thoroughly wash and peel all produce, especially any you eat raw.
Receive an infected organ transplant or transfused blood. In rare cases, toxoplasmosis can be transmitted through an organ transplant or blood transfusion.
When a person becomes infected with T. gondii, the parasite forms cysts that can affect almost any part of the body — often your brain and muscle tissue of different organs, including the heart.
If you're generally healthy, your immune system keeps the parasites in check. They remain in your body in an inactive state, providing you with lifelong immunity so that you can't become infected with the parasite again. But if your immune system is weakened by disease or certain medications, the infection can be reactivated, leading to serious complications.
Anyone can become infected with toxoplasmosis. The parasite is found throughout the world.
You're at risk of serious health problems from toxoplasmosis infection if:
You have HIV/AIDS. Many people with HIV/AIDS also have toxoplasmosis, either a recent infection or an old infection that has reactivated.
You're undergoing chemotherapy. Chemotherapy affects your immune system, making it difficult for your body to fight even minor infections.
You take steroids or other immunosuppressant drugs. Medications used to treat certain nonmalignant conditions suppress your immune system and make you more likely to develop complications of toxoplasmosis.
If you have a normal immune system, you're not likely to experience complications of toxoplasmosis, although otherwise healthy people sometimes develop eye infections. Untreated, these infections can lead to blindness.
But if your immune system is weakened, especially as a result of HIV/AIDS, toxoplasmosis can lead to seizures and life-threatening illnesses such as encephalitis — a serious brain infection.
In people with AIDS, untreated encephalitis from toxoplasmosis is fatal. Relapse is a constant concern for people with toxoplasmosis who also have a weakened immune system.
Children with congenital toxoplasmosis may develop disabling complications, including hearing loss, mental disability and blindness.
Signs and symptoms of trachoma usually affect both eyes and may include: Mild itching and irritation of the eyes and eyelids, Eye discharge containing mucus or pus, Eyelid swelling, Light sensitivity (photophobia), Eye pain, Eye redness, Vision loss.
Young children are particularly susceptible to infection. But the disease progresses slowly, and the more painful symptoms may not emerge until adulthood.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has identified five stages in the development of trachoma:
Inflammation — follicular. The early infection has five or more follicles — small bumps that contain lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell — visible with magnification on the inner surface of your upper eyelid (conjunctiva).
Inflammation — intense. In this stage, your eye is now highly infectious and becomes irritated, with a thickening or swelling of the upper eyelid.
Eyelid scarring. Repeated infections lead to scarring of the inner eyelid. The scars often appear as white lines when examined with magnification. Your eyelid may become distorted and may turn in (entropion).
In-turned eyelashes (trichiasis). The scarred inner lining of your eyelid continues to deform, causing your lashes to turn in so that they rub on and scratch the transparent outer surface of your eye (cornea).
Corneal clouding (opacity). The cornea becomes affected by an inflammation that is most commonly seen under your upper lid. Continuous inflammation compounded by scratching from the in-turned lashes leads to clouding of the cornea.
All the signs of trachoma are more severe in your upper lid than in your lower lid. Without intervention, a disease process that begins in childhood can continue to advance into adulthood.
Call your doctor if you or your child has itchy or irritated eyes or discharge from the eyes, especially if you live in or recently traveled to an area where trachoma is common. Trachoma is a contagious condition. Treating it as soon as possible helps prevent serious infection.
Trachoma is caused by certain subtypes of Chlamydia trachomatis, a bacterium that can also cause the sexually transmitted infection chlamydia.
Trachoma spreads through contact with discharge from the eyes or nose of an infected person. Hands, clothing, towels and insects can all be routes for transmission. In developing countries, eye-seeking flies also are a means of transmission.
Factors that increase your risk of contracting trachoma include:
Crowded living conditions. People living in close contact are at greater risk of spreading infection.
Poor sanitation. Poor sanitary conditions, inadequate access to water, and lack of hygiene, such as unclean faces or hands, help spread the disease.
Age. In areas where the disease is active, it's most common in children ages 4 to 6.
Sex. In some areas, women's rate of contracting the disease is two to six times higher than that of men. This may be attributed to the fact that women have more contact with children, who are the primary reservoir of infection.
Flies. People living in areas with problems controlling the fly population may be more susceptible to infection.
One episode of trachoma caused by Chlamydia trachomatis is easily treated with early detection and use of antibiotics. Repeated or secondary infections can lead to complications, including: Scarring of the inner eyelid, Eyelid deformities, such as an inward-folding eyelid (entropion) or ingrown eyelashes (trichiasis), which can scratch the cornea, Corneal scarring or cloudiness, Partial or complete vision loss.
Transient global amnesia is identified by its main symptom, which is the inability to form new memories and to recall the recent past. Once that symptom is confirmed, ruling out other possible causes of amnesia is important.
These signs and symptoms must be present to diagnose transient global amnesia: Sudden onset of memory loss, verified by a witness, Retention of personal identity despite memory loss, Normal cognition, such as the ability to recognize and name familiar objects and follow simple directions, Absence of signs indicating damage to a particular area of the brain, such as limb paralysis, involuntary movement or impaired word recognition.
Additional symptoms and history that may help diagnose transient global amnesia: Duration of no more than 24 hours and generally shorter, Gradual return of memory, No recent head injury, No evidence of seizures during the period of amnesia, No history of active epilepsy.
Along with these signs and symptoms, a common feature of transient global amnesia includes repetitive questioning, usually of the same question — for example, "What am I doing here?" or "How did we get here?"
Seek immediate medical attention for anyone who quickly goes from normal awareness of present reality to confusion about what just happened. If the person experiencing memory loss is too confused to call an ambulance, call one yourself.
Although transient global amnesia isn't harmful, there's no easy way to distinguish the condition from the life-threatening illnesses that can also cause sudden memory loss.
The underlying cause of transient global amnesia is unknown. There appears to be a link between transient global amnesia and a history of migraines, though the underlying factors that contribute to both conditions aren't fully understood. Another possible cause is the overfilling of veins with blood due to some sort of blockage or other abnormality with the flow of blood (venous congestion).
While the likelihood of transient global amnesia after these events is very low, some commonly reported events that may trigger it include: Sudden immersion in cold or hot water, Strenuous physical activity, Sexual intercourse, Medical procedures, such as angiography or endoscopy, Mild head trauma, Acute emotional distress, as might be provoked by bad news, conflict or overwork.
Interestingly, high blood pressure and high cholesterol — which are closely linked to strokes —are not risk factors for transient global amnesia. This is probably because transient global amnesia doesn't represent blood vessel diseases of aging. Your sex doesn't seem to affect your risk, either.
The clearest risk factors are:
Age. People age 50 and older have a higher risk of transient global amnesia than do younger people.
History of migraines. If you have migraines, your risk of transient global amnesia is significantly higher than that of someone without migraines.
Transient global amnesia has no direct complications. It's not a risk factor for stroke or epilepsy. It's possible to have a second episode of transient global amnesia, but it's extremely rare to have more than two.
But, even temporary memory loss can cause emotional distress. If you need reassurance, ask your doctor to go over the results of your neurological exam and diagnostic tests with you.
Transient ischemic attacks usually last a few minutes. Most signs and symptoms disappear within an hour, though rarely symptoms may last up to 24 hours. The signs and symptoms of a TIA resemble those found early in a stroke and may include sudden onset of: Weakness, numbness or paralysis in your face, arm or leg, typically on one side of your body, Slurred or garbled speech or difficulty understanding others, Blindness in one or both eyes or double vision, Vertigo or loss of balance or coordination.
You may have more than one TIA, and the recurrent signs and symptoms may be similar or different depending on which area of the brain is involved.
Since TIAs most often occur hours or days before a stroke, seeking medical attention emergently following a possible TIA is essential. Seek immediate medical attention if you suspect you've had a transient ischemic attack. Prompt evaluation and identification of potentially treatable conditions may help you prevent a stroke.
A transient ischemic attack has the same origins as that of an ischemic stroke, the most common type of stroke. In an ischemic stroke, a clot blocks the blood supply to part of your brain. In a transient ischemic attack, unlike a stroke, the blockage is brief, and there is no permanent damage.
The underlying cause of a TIA often is a buildup of cholesterol-containing fatty deposits called plaques (atherosclerosis) in an artery or one of its branches that supplies oxygen and nutrients to your brain.
Plaques can decrease the blood flow through an artery or lead to the development of a clot. A blood clot moving to an artery that supplies your brain from another part of your body, most commonly from your heart, also may cause a TIA.
Some risk factors for a transient ischemic attack and stroke can't be changed. Others you can control.
You can't change the following risk factors for a transient ischemic attack and stroke. But knowing you're at risk can motivate you to change your lifestyle to reduce other risks.
Family history. Your risk may be greater if one of your family members has had a TIA or a stroke.
Age. Your risk increases as you get older, especially after age 55.
Sex. Men have a slightly higher risk of a TIA and a stroke. But as women age, their risk of a stroke goes up.
Prior transient ischemic attack. If you've had one or more TIAs, you're much more likely to have a stroke.
Sickle cell disease. Stroke is a frequent complication of sickle cell disease. Another name for this inherited disorder is sickle cell anemia. Sickle-shaped blood cells carry less oxygen and also tend to get stuck in artery walls, hampering blood flow to the brain. However, with proper treatment of sickle cell disease, you can lower your risk of a stroke.
You can control or treat a number of factors — including certain health conditions and lifestyle choices — that increase your risk of a stroke. Having one or more of these risk factors doesn't mean you'll have a stroke, but your risk increases if you have two or more of them.
High blood pressure. The risk of a stroke begins to increase at blood pressure readings higher than 140/90 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). Your doctor will help you decide on a target blood pressure based on your age, whether you have diabetes and other factors.
High cholesterol. Eating less cholesterol and fat, especially saturated fat and trans fat, may reduce the plaques in your arteries. If you can't control your cholesterol through dietary changes alone, your doctor may prescribe a statin or another type of cholesterol-lowering medication.
Cardiovascular disease. This includes heart failure, a heart defect, a heart infection or an abnormal heart rhythm.
Carotid artery disease. The blood vessels in your neck that lead to your brain become clogged.
Peripheral artery disease (PAD). The blood vessels that carry blood to your arms and legs become clogged.
Diabetes. Diabetes increases the severity of atherosclerosis — narrowing of the arteries due to accumulation of fatty deposits — and the speed with which it develops.
High levels of homocysteine. Elevated levels of this amino acid in your blood can cause your arteries to thicken and scar, which makes them more susceptible to clots.
Excess weight. Obesity, especially carrying extra weight in the abdominal area, increases stroke risk in both men and women.
Cigarette smoking. Quit smoking to reduce your risk of a TIA and a stroke. Smoking increases your risk of blood clots, raises your blood pressure and contributes to the development of cholesterol-containing fatty deposits in your arteries (atherosclerosis).
Physical inactivity. Engaging in 30 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise most days helps reduce risk.
Poor nutrition. Reducing your intake of fat and salt decreases your risk of a TIA and a stroke.
Heavy drinking. If you drink alcohol, limit yourself to no more than two drinks daily if you're a man and one drink daily if you're a woman.
Use of illicit drugs. Avoid cocaine and other illicit drugs.
Transposition of the great arteries symptoms include: Blue color of the skin (cyanosis), Shortness of breath, Lack of appetite, Poor weight gain.
Transposition of the great arteries is often detected as soon as your baby is born or during the first week of life.
If signs and symptoms didn't appear in the hospital, seek emergency medical help if you notice that your baby develops bluish discoloration of the skin (cyanosis), especially involving the face and body.
Transposition of the great arteries occurs during fetal growth when your baby's heart is developing. Why this defect occurs is unknown in most cases.
Normally, the pulmonary artery — which carries blood from your heart to your lungs to receive oxygen — is attached to the lower right chamber (right ventricle).
From your lungs, the oxygen-rich blood goes to your heart's upper left chamber (left atrium), through the mitral valve into the lower left chamber (left ventricle). The aorta is normally attached to the left ventricle. It carries oxygen-rich blood out of your heart back to the rest of your body.
In transposition of the great arteries, the positions of the pulmonary artery and the aorta are switched. The pulmonary artery is connected to the left ventricle, and the aorta is connected to the right ventricle.
Oxygen-poor blood circulates through the right side of the heart and back to the body without passing through the lungs. Oxygen-rich blood circulates through the left side of the heart and directly back into the lungs without being circulated to the rest of the body.
Circulation of oxygen-poor blood through the body causes the skin to have a blue tint (cyanosis). Because of this, transposition of the great arteries is called a cyanotic congenital heart defect.
Although some factors, such as genetics, rubella or other viral illnesses during pregnancy, maternal age over 40, or maternal diabetes, may increase the risk of this condition, in most cases the cause is unknown.
In this rare type of transposition of the great arteries — called levo-transposition of the great arteries or sometimes referred to as congenitally corrected transposition — the two ventricles are switched so that the left ventricle is on the heart's right side and receives blood from the right atrium, and the right ventricle is on the heart's left side and receives blood from the left atrium. This type of transposition of the great arteries is sometimes also called congenitally corrected transposition.
However, the blood usually circulates correctly through the heart and body. The right-sided left ventricle attaches to the pulmonary artery, which delivers oxygen-poor blood to the lungs, while the left-sided right ventricle attaches to the aorta, which carries oxygen-rich blood to the body.
Because the circulation is congenitally corrected, some people with this rare condition may not experience symptoms for many years and go undiagnosed until adulthood. However, many people with this condition have other congenital heart defects that may cause symptoms, and these people are usually found to have heart disease as children. Depending on their condition and heart defects, people may have surgery to repair the defects.
The right ventricle may not function well as the main pumping chamber over time, which can lead to heart failure in adults. Adults often also have abnormal function of the valve guarding the right ventricle (tricuspid valve). Abnormal valve and ventricular function can cause heart failure. Treatment such as valve replacement, ventricular assist devices or a heart transplant may eventually be needed.
Although the exact cause of transposition of the great arteries is unknown, several factors may increase the risk of a baby being born with this condition, including: A history of German measles (rubella) or another viral illness in the mother during pregnancy, Drinking alcohol during pregnancy, Smoking during pregnancy, A mother who has poorly controlled diabetes.
Potential complications of transposition of the great arteries include:
Lack of oxygen to tissues. Your baby's tissues will receive too little oxygen (hypoxia). Unless there's some mixing of oxygen-rich blood and oxygen-poor blood within your baby's body, he or she won't be able to survive.
Heart failure. Heart failure — a condition in which the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs — may develop over time because the right ventricle is pumping under higher pressure than usual. This added stress may make the muscle of the right ventricle stiff or weak.
Lung damage. Too much oxygen-rich blood can cause damage to the lungs, making breathing difficult.
Surgery is required for all babies with transposition of the great arteries early in life, usually within the first week. The most common type of surgery to correct transposition when identified in babies is the arterial switch operation. During this operation, the surgeon moves the great arteries so they are connected to the correct pumping chamber. The arteries that supply the heart (coronary arteries) must also be moved. Although this operation is lifesaving, problems may occur later in life, including: Narrowing of the arteries that supply blood to the heart (coronary arteries), Heart rhythm abnormalities (arrhythmias), Heart muscle weakness or stiffness leading to heart failure, Narrowed connections where the great vessels are connected, Leaky heart valves.
Signs and symptoms of transverse myelitis usually develop over a few hours to a few days and may sometimes progress gradually over several weeks.
Transverse myelitis usually affects both sides of the body below the affected area of the spinal cord, but sometimes there are symptoms on just one side of the body.
Typical signs and symptoms include:
Pain. Transverse myelitis pain may begin suddenly in your lower back. Sharp pain may shoot down your legs or arms or around your chest or abdomen. Pain symptoms vary based on the part of your spinal cord that's affected.
Abnormal sensations. Some people with transverse myelitis report sensations of numbness, tingling, coldness or burning. Some are especially sensitive to the light touch of clothing or to extreme heat or cold. You may feel as if something is tightly wrapping the skin of your chest, abdomen or legs.
Weakness in your arms or legs. Some people notice heaviness in the legs, or that they're stumbling or dragging one foot. Others may develop severe weakness or even total paralysis.
Bladder and bowel problems. This may include needing to urinate more frequently, urinary incontinence, difficulty urinating and constipation.
Call your doctor or get emergency medical care if you're experiencing signs and symptoms of transverse myelitis. A number of neurological disorders can cause sensory problems, weakness, and bladder or bowel dysfunction including compression of the spinal cord, which is a surgical emergency.
Another less common cause is a stroke of the spinal cord due to impaired blood circulation. This can be caused by blockage of a blood vessel that supplies blood to the spinal cord, which may occur with surgery of the aorta or increased clotting of the blood. It's important to get a prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment.
The exact reason for transverse myelitis is not known. Sometimes there is no known cause.
Viral, bacterial and fungal infections affecting the spinal cord may cause transverse myelitis. In most cases, the inflammatory disorder appears after recovery from the infection.
Viruses associated with transverse myelitis are: Herpes viruses, including the one that causes shingles and chickenpox (zoster), Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr, HIV, Enteroviruses such as poliovirus and coxsackievirus, West Nile, Echovirus, Zika, Influenza, Hepatitis B, Mumps, measles and rubella.
Other viruses may trigger an autoimmune reaction without directly infecting the spinal cord.
Bacterial infections that are associated with transverse myelitis include: Lyme disease, Syphilis, Tuberculosis, Actinomyces, Pertussis, Tetanus, Diphtheria.
Bacterial skin infections, gastroenteritis and certain types of bacterial pneumonia also may cause transverse myelitis.
Rarely, parasites and fungal infections may infect the spinal cord.
There are a number of inflammatory conditions that appear to cause the disorder:
Multiple sclerosis is a disorder in which the immune system destroys myelin surrounding nerves in your spinal cord and brain. Transverse myelitis can be the first sign of multiple sclerosis or represent a relapse. Transverse myelitis as a sign of multiple sclerosis usually causes symptoms on only one side of your body.
Neuromyelitis optica (Devic's disease) is a condition that causes inflammation and myelin loss around the spinal cord and the nerve in your eye that transmits information to your brain. Transverse myelitis associated with neuromyelitis optica usually affects both sides of your body.
In addition to transverse myelitis, you may experience symptoms of damage to myelin of the optic nerve, including pain in the eye with movement and temporary vision loss. This can happen with or separately from transverse myelitis symptoms. However, some people with neuromyelitis optica don't experience eye-related problems and might have only recurrent episodes of transverse myelitis.
Autoimmune disorders probably contribute to transverse myelitis in some people. These disorders include lupus, which can affect multiple body systems, and Sjogren's syndrome, which causes severe dryness of the mouth and eyes.
Transverse myelitis associated with an autoimmune disorder may be a warning sign of neuromyelitis optica. Neuromyelitis optica occurs more frequently in people with other autoimmune diseases.
Vaccinations for infectious diseases have occasionally been associated as a possible trigger. However, at this time the association is not strong enough to warrant limiting any vaccine.
Sarcoidosis is a condition that leads to inflammation in many areas of the body, including the spinal cord and optic nerve. It may mimic neuromyelitis optica, but typically sarcoidosis symptoms develop more slowly. The cause of sarcoidosis isn't understood.
People with transverse myelitis usually experience only one episode. However, complications often linger, including the following:
Pain, one of the most common debilitating long-term complications of the disorder.
Stiffness, tightness or painful spasms in your muscles (muscle spasticity). This is most common in the buttocks and legs.
Partial or total paralysis of your arms, legs or both. This may persist after the first symptoms.
Sexual dysfunction, a common complication of transverse myelitis. Men may experience difficulty achieving an erection or reaching orgasm. Women may have difficulty reaching orgasm.
Depression or anxiety, which is common in those with long-term complications because of the significant changes in lifestyle, the stress of chronic pain or disability, and the impact of sexual dysfunction on relationships.
Traumatic brain injury can have wide-ranging physical and psychological effects. Some signs or symptoms may appear immediately after the traumatic event, while others may appear days or weeks later.
The signs and symptoms of mild traumatic brain injury may include: Loss of consciousness for a few seconds to a few minutes, No loss of consciousness, but a state of being dazed, confused or disoriented, Headache, Nausea or vomiting, Fatigue or drowsiness, Problems with speech, Difficulty sleeping, Sleeping more than usual, Dizziness or loss of balance.
Sensory problems, such as blurred vision, ringing in the ears, a bad taste in the mouth or changes in the ability to smell, Sensitivity to light or sound.
Memory or concentration problems, Mood changes or mood swings, Feeling depressed or anxious.
Moderate to severe traumatic brain injuries can include any of the signs and symptoms of mild injury, as well as these symptoms that may appear within the first hours to days after a head injury: Loss of consciousness from several minutes to hours, Persistent headache or headache that worsens, Repeated vomiting or nausea, Convulsions or seizures, Dilation of one or both pupils of the eyes, Clear fluids draining from the nose or ears, Inability to awaken from sleep, Weakness or numbness in fingers and toes, Loss of coordination.
Profound confusion, Agitation, combativeness or other unusual behavior, Slurred speech, Coma and other disorders of consciousness.
Infants and young children with brain injuries might not be able to communicate headaches, sensory problems, confusion and similar symptoms. In a child with traumatic brain injury, you may observe: Change in eating or nursing habits, Unusual or easy irritability, Persistent crying and inability to be consoled, Change in ability to pay attention, Change in sleep habits, Seizures, Sad or depressed mood, Drowsiness, Loss of interest in favorite toys or activities.
Always see your doctor if you or your child has received a blow to the head or body that concerns you or causes behavioral changes. Seek emergency medical care if there are any signs or symptoms of traumatic brain injury following a recent blow or other traumatic injury to the head.
The terms "mild," "moderate" and "severe" are used to describe the effect of the injury on brain function. A mild injury to the brain is still a serious injury that requires prompt attention and an accurate diagnosis.
Traumatic brain injury is usually caused by a blow or other traumatic injury to the head or body. The degree of damage can depend on several factors, including the nature of the injury and the force of impact.
Common events causing traumatic brain injury include the following:
Falls. Falls from bed or a ladder, down stairs, in the bath and other falls are the most common cause of traumatic brain injury overall, particularly in older adults and young children.
Vehicle-related collisions. Collisions involving cars, motorcycles or bicycles — and pedestrians involved in such accidents — are a common cause of traumatic brain injury.
Violence. Gunshot wounds, domestic violence, child abuse and other assaults are common causes. Shaken baby syndrome is a traumatic brain injury in infants caused by violent shaking.
Sports injuries. Traumatic brain injuries may be caused by injuries from a number of sports, including soccer, boxing, football, baseball, lacrosse, skateboarding, hockey, and other high-impact or extreme sports. These are particularly common in youth.
Explosive blasts and other combat injuries. Explosive blasts are a common cause of traumatic brain injury in active-duty military personnel. Although how the damage occurs isn't yet well-understood, many researchers believe that the pressure wave passing through the brain significantly disrupts brain function.
Traumatic brain injury also results from penetrating wounds, severe blows to the head with shrapnel or debris, and falls or bodily collisions with objects following a blast.
The people most at risk of traumatic brain injury include: Children, especially newborns to 4-year-olds, Young adults, especially those between ages 15 and 24, Adults age 60 and older, Males in any age group.
Several complications can occur immediately or soon after a traumatic brain injury. Severe injuries increase the risk of a greater number and more-severe complications.
Moderate to severe traumatic brain injury can result in prolonged or permanent changes in a person's state of consciousness, awareness or responsiveness. Different states of consciousness include:
Coma. A person in a coma is unconscious, unaware of anything and unable to respond to any stimulus. This results from widespread damage to all parts of the brain. After a few days to a few weeks, a person may emerge from a coma or enter a vegetative state.
Vegetative state. Widespread damage to the brain can result in a vegetative state. Although the person is unaware of surroundings, he or she may open his or her eyes, make sounds, respond to reflexes, or move.
It's possible that a vegetative state can become permanent, but often individuals progress to a minimally conscious state.
Minimally conscious state. A minimally conscious state is a condition of severely altered consciousness but with some signs of self-awareness or awareness of one's environment. It is sometimes a transitional state from a coma or vegetative condition to greater recovery.
Brain death. When there is no measurable activity in the brain and the brainstem, this is called brain death. In a person who has been declared brain dead, removal of breathing devices will result in cessation of breathing and eventual heart failure. Brain death is considered irreversible.
Seizures. Some people with traumatic brain injury will develop seizures. The seizures may occur only in the early stages, or years after the injury. Recurrent seizures are called post-traumatic epilepsy.
Fluid buildup in the brain (hydrocephalus). Cerebrospinal fluid may build up in the spaces in the brain (cerebral ventricles) of some people who have had traumatic brain injuries, causing increased pressure and swelling in the brain.
Infections. Skull fractures or penetrating wounds can tear the layers of protective tissues (meninges) that surround the brain. This can enable bacteria to enter the brain and cause infections. An infection of the meninges (meningitis) could spread to the rest of the nervous system if not treated.
Blood vessel damage. Several small or large blood vessels in the brain may be damaged in a traumatic brain injury. This damage could lead to a stroke, blood clots or other problems.
Headaches. Frequent headaches are very common after a traumatic brain injury. They may begin within a week after the injury and could persist as long as several months.
Vertigo. Many people experience vertigo, a condition characterized by dizziness, after a traumatic brain injury.
Sometimes, any or several of these symptoms might linger for a few weeks to a few months after a traumatic brain injury. This is currently referred to as persistent post-concussive symptoms. When a combination of these symptoms last for an extended period of time, this is generally referred to as post-concussion syndrome.
Traumatic brain injuries at the base of the skull can cause nerve damage to the nerves that emerge directly from the brain (cranial nerves). Cranial nerve damage may result in: Paralysis of facial muscles or losing sensation in the face, Loss of or altered sense of smell, Loss of or altered sense of taste, Loss of vision or double vision, Swallowing problems, Dizziness, Ringing in the ear, Hearing loss.
Many people who have had a significant brain injury will experience changes in their thinking (cognitive) skills. It may be more difficult to focus and take longer to process your thoughts. Traumatic brain injury can result in problems with many skills, including: Memory, Learning, Reasoning, Judgment, Attention or concentration.
Problem-solving, Multitasking, Organization, Planning, Decision-making, Beginning or completing tasks.
Language and communications problems are common following traumatic brain injuries. These problems can cause frustration, conflict and misunderstanding for people with a traumatic brain injury, as well as family members, friends and care providers.
Communication problems may include: Difficulty understanding speech or writing, Difficulty speaking or writing, Inability to organize thoughts and ideas, Trouble following and participating in conversations.
Trouble with turn taking or topic selection in conversations, Problems with changes in tone, pitch or emphasis to express emotions, attitudes or subtle differences in meaning, Difficulty understanding nonverbal signals, Trouble reading cues from listeners, Trouble starting or stopping conversations, Inability to use the muscles needed to form words (dysarthria).
People who've experienced brain injury often experience changes in behaviors. These may include: Difficulty with self-control, Lack of awareness of abilities, Risky behavior, Difficulty in social situations, Verbal or physical outbursts.
Emotional changes may include: Depression, Anxiety, Mood swings, Irritability, Lack of empathy for others, Anger, Insomnia.
Problems involving senses may include: Persistent ringing in the ears, Difficulty recognizing objects, Impaired hand-eye coordination, Blind spots or double vision, A bitter taste, a bad smell or difficulty smelling, Skin tingling, pain or itching, Trouble with balance or dizziness.
Research suggests that repeated or severe traumatic brain injuries might increase the risk of degenerative brain diseases. But, this risk can't be predicted for an individual — and researchers are still investigating if, why and how traumatic brain injuries might be related to degenerative brain diseases.
A degenerative brain disorder can cause gradual loss of brain functions, including: Alzheimer's disease, which primarily causes the progressive loss of memory and other thinking skills, Parkinson's disease, a progressive condition that causes movement problems, such as tremors, rigidity and slow movements, Dementia pugilistica — most often associated with repetitive blows to the head in career boxing — which causes symptoms of dementia and movement problems.
Traveler's diarrhea usually begins abruptly during your trip or shortly after you return home. Most cases improve within one to two days without treatment and clear up completely within a week. However, you can have multiple episodes of traveler's diarrhea during one trip.
The most common signs and symptoms of traveler's diarrhea are: Abrupt onset of passage of three or more loose stools a day, An urgent need to defecate, Abdominal cramps, Nausea, Vomiting, Fever.
Sometimes, people experience moderate to severe dehydration, persistent vomiting, a high fever, bloody stools, or severe pain in the abdomen or rectum. If you or your child experiences any of these signs or symptoms or if the diarrhea lasts longer than a few days, it's time to see a doctor.
Traveler's diarrhea usually goes away on its own within several days. Signs and symptoms may last longer and be more severe if the condition is caused by organisms other than common bacteria. In such cases, you may need prescription medications to help you get better.
If you're an adult, see your doctor if: Your diarrhea persists beyond two days, You become dehydrated, You have severe abdominal or rectal pain, You have bloody or black stools, You have a fever above 102 F (39 C).
A local embassy or consulate may be able to help you find a well-regarded medical professional who speaks your language.
Be especially cautious with children because traveler's diarrhea can cause severe dehydration in a short time. Call a doctor if your child is sick and exhibits any of the following signs or symptoms: Persistent vomiting, A fever of 102 F (39 C) or more, Bloody stools or severe diarrhea, Dry mouth or crying without tears, Signs of being unusually sleepy, drowsy or unresponsive, Decreased volume of urine, including fewer wet diapers in infants.
It's possible that traveler's diarrhea may stem from the stress of traveling or a change in diet. But usually an infectious agent — including various bacteria, viruses and parasites — is to blame. You typically develop traveler's diarrhea after ingesting food or water that's contaminated with organisms from feces.
So why aren't natives of high-risk countries affected in the same way? Often their bodies have become accustomed to the bacteria and have developed immunity to them.
Each year millions of international travelers experience traveler's diarrhea. High-risk destinations for traveler's diarrhea include areas of: Central America, South America, Mexico, Africa, The Middle East, Asia.
Traveling to Eastern Europe, South Africa and a few Caribbean islands also poses some risk. However, your risk of traveler's diarrhea is generally low in Northern and Western Europe, Japan, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and the United States.
Your chances of getting traveler's diarrhea are mostly determined by your destination. But certain groups of people have a greater risk of developing the condition. These include:
Young adults. The condition is slightly more common in young adult tourists. Though the reasons why aren't clear, it's possible that young adults lack acquired immunity. They may also be more adventurous than older people in their travels and dietary choices, or they may be less vigilant in avoiding contaminated foods.
People with weakened immune systems. A weakened immune system increases vulnerability to infections.
People with diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease or cirrhosis of the liver. These conditions can leave you more prone to infection or increase your risk of a more-severe infection.
People who take acid blockers or antacids. Acid in the stomach tends to destroy organisms, so a reduction in stomach acid may leave more opportunity for bacterial survival.
People who travel during certain seasons. The risk of traveler's diarrhea varies by season in certain parts of the world. For example, risk is highest in South Asia during the hot months just before the monsoons.
Because you lose vital fluids, salts and minerals during a bout with traveler's diarrhea, you may become dehydrated. Dehydration is especially dangerous for children, older adults and people with weakened immune systems.
Dehydration caused by diarrhea can cause serious complications, including organ damage, shock or coma. Signs and symptoms of dehydration include a very dry mouth, intense thirst, little or no urination, and extreme weakness.
Signs and symptoms of trichinosis infection and their severity vary depending on the number of larvae consumed in the infected meat. Abdominal symptoms can occur one to two days after infection. Other symptoms usually start two to eight weeks after infection.
Mild cases of trichinosis — those with only a small number of parasites in your body — may cause no recognizable signs or symptoms. Symptoms can develop with moderate or heavy infestation, sometimes progressing as the parasite travels through your body.
You swallow trichinella larvae encased in a cyst. Your digestive juices dissolve the cyst, releasing the parasite into your body. The larvae then penetrate the wall of the small intestine, where they mature into adult worms and mate. At this stage, you may experience: Diarrhea, Abdominal pain, Fatigue, Nausea and vomiting.
About a week after infection, the adult female worms produce larvae that go through the intestinal wall, enter your bloodstream, and eventually burrow into muscle or other tissue. This tissue invasion can cause: High fever, Muscle pain and tenderness, Swelling of the eyelids or face, Weakness, Headache, Sensitivity to light, Pink eye (conjunctivitis).
If you have a mild case of trichinosis with no symptoms, you might not need medical attention. If you experience gastrointestinal problems or muscle pain and swelling about a week after eating pork or wild-animal meat, talk to your doctor.
People get trichinosis when they eat undercooked meat — such as pork, bear, walrus or horse — that is infected with the immature form (larvae) of the trichinella roundworm. In nature, animals are infected when they feed on other infected animals. Pigs and horses can become infected with trichinosis when they feed on garbage containing infected meat scraps. Cattle don't eat meat, but some cases of trichinosis in humans have been linked to eating beef that was mixed with infected pork or ground in a grinder previously used for contaminated pork.
Due to increased regulation of pork feed and products in the United States, pigs have become a less common source of infection. Wild animals, including bear, continue to be sources of infection.
Risk factors for trichinosis include:
Improper food preparation. Trichinosis infects humans when they eat undercooked infected meat, such as pork, bear or walrus, or other meat contaminated by grinders or other equipment.
Rural areas. Trichinosis is more common in rural areas. In the United States, higher rates of infection are found in hog-raising regions.
Consumption of wild or noncommercial meats. Public health measures have greatly decreased the incidence of trichinosis in commercial meats, but noncommercial farm-raised animals — particularly those with access to wild-animal carcasses — have higher rates of infection. Wild animals, such as bears and walruses, are still common sources of infection.
Except in severe cases, complications related to trichinosis are rare. In cases of heavy infestation, larvae can migrate to vital organs, causing potentially dangerous, even fatal, complications, including: Myocarditis — an inflammation of the myocardium, the thick muscular layer of your heart wall, Encephalitis — an inflammation of your brain, Meningitis — an inflammation of the membranes (meninges) and cerebrospinal fluid surrounding your brain and spinal cord, Pneumonia — an inflammation of your lungs.
Many women and most men with trichomoniasis have no symptoms, at least not at first. Trichomoniasis signs and symptoms for women include: An often foul-smelling vaginal discharge — which might be white, gray, yellow or green, Genital redness, burning and itching, Pain with urination or sexual intercourse.
Trichomoniasis rarely causes symptoms in men. When men do have signs and symptoms, however, they might include: Irritation inside the penis, Burning with urination or after ejaculation, Discharge from the penis.
See your doctor if you have a foul-smelling vaginal discharge or if you have pain with urination or sexual intercourse.
Trichomoniasis is caused by a one-celled protozoan, a type of tiny parasite that travels between people during sexual intercourse. The incubation period between exposure and infection is unknown, but it's thought to range from four to 28 days.
Risk factors include having: Multiple sexual partners, A history of other sexually transmitted infections, A previous episode of trichomoniasis, Sex without a condom.
Pregnant women who have trichomoniasis might: Deliver prematurely, Have a baby with a low birth weight, Transmit the infection to the baby as he or she passes through the birth canal.
Having trichomoniasis also appears to make it easier for women to become infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
Signs and symptoms of trichotillomania often include: Repeatedly pulling your hair out, typically from your scalp, eyebrows or eyelashes, but sometimes from other body areas, and sites may vary over time, An increasing sense of tension before pulling, or when you try to resist pulling, A sense of pleasure or relief after the hair is pulled, Noticeable hair loss, such as shortened hair or thinned or bald areas on the scalp or other areas of your body, including sparse or missing eyelashes or eyebrows, Preference for specific types of hair, rituals that accompany hair pulling or patterns of hair pulling, Biting, chewing or eating pulled-out hair, Playing with pulled-out hair or rubbing it across your lips or face, Repeatedly trying to stop pulling out your hair or trying to do it less often without success, Significant distress or problems at work, school or in social situations related to pulling out your hair.
Many people who have trichotillomania also pick their skin, bite their nails or chew their lips. Sometimes pulling hairs from pets or dolls or from materials, such as clothes or blankets, may be a sign. Most people with trichotillomania pull hair in private and generally try to hide the disorder from others.
For people with trichotillomania, hair pulling can be:
Focused. Some people pull their hair intentionally to relieve tension or distress — for example, pulling hair out to get relief from the overwhelming urge to pull hair. Some people may develop elaborate rituals for pulling hair, such as finding just the right hair or biting pulled hairs.
Automatic. Some people pull their hair without even realizing they're doing it, such as when they're bored, reading or watching TV.
The same person may do both focused and automatic hair pulling, depending on the situation and mood. Certain positions or rituals may trigger hair pulling, such as resting your head on your hand or brushing your hair.
Trichotillomania can be related to emotions:
Negative emotions. For many people with trichotillomania, hair pulling is a way of dealing with negative or uncomfortable feelings, such as stress, anxiety, tension, boredom, loneliness, fatigue or frustration.
Positive feelings. People with trichotillomania often find that pulling out hair feels satisfying and provides a measure of relief. As a result, they continue to pull their hair to maintain these positive feelings.
Trichotillomania is a long-term (chronic) disorder. Without treatment, symptoms can vary in severity over time. For example, the hormonal changes of menstruation can worsen symptoms in women. For some people, if not treated, symptoms can come and go for weeks, months or years at a time. Rarely, hair pulling ends within a few years of starting.
If you can't stop pulling out your hair or you feel embarrassed or ashamed by your appearance as a result of your hair pulling, talk to your doctor. Trichotillomania is not just a bad habit, it's a mental health disorder, and it's unlikely to get better without treatment.
The cause of trichotillomania is unclear. But like many complex disorders, trichotillomania probably results from a combination of genetic and environmental factors.
These factors tend to increase the risk of trichotillomania:
Family history. Genetics may play a role in the development of trichotillomania, and the disorder may occur in those who have a close relative with the disorder.
Age. Trichotillomania usually develops just before or during the early teens — most often between the ages of 10 and 13 years — and it's often a lifelong problem. Infants also can be prone to hair pulling, but this is usually mild and goes away on its own without treatment.
Other disorders. People who have trichotillomania may also have other disorders, such as depression, anxiety or obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
Stress. Severely stressful situations or events may trigger trichotillomania in some people.
Although far more women than men are treated for trichotillomania, this may be because women are more likely to seek medical advice. In early childhood, boys and girls appear to be equally affected.
Although it may not seem particularly serious, trichotillomania can have a major negative impact on your life. Complications may include:
Emotional distress. Many people with trichotillomania report feeling shame, humiliation and embarrassment. They may experience low self-esteem, depression, anxiety, and alcohol or street drug use because of their condition.
Problems with social and work functioning. Embarrassment because of hair loss may lead you to avoid social activities and job opportunities. People with trichotillomania may wear wigs, style their hair to disguise bald patches or wear false eyelashes. Some people may avoid intimacy for fear that their condition will be discovered.
Skin and hair damage. Constant hair pulling can cause scarring and other damage, including infections, to the skin on your scalp or the specific area where hair is pulled and can permanently affect hair growth.
Hairballs. Eating your hair may lead to a large, matted hairball (trichobezoar) in your digestive tract. Over a period of years, the hairball can cause weight loss, vomiting, intestinal obstruction and even death.
Tricuspid atresia symptoms become evident soon after birth, and can include: Blue tinge to the skin and lips (cyanosis), Difficulty breathing, Tiring easily, especially during feedings, Slow growth and poor weight gain.
Some babies or older people with tricuspid atresia also develop symptoms of heart failure, including: Fatigue and weakness, Shortness of breath, Swelling (edema) in the legs, ankles and feet, Swelling of the abdomen (ascites), Sudden weight gain from fluid retention.
Tell your doctor if you notice any of the above symptoms in yourself or your child.
Tricuspid atresia occurs during fetal heart development. Some genetic factors, such as Down syndrome, might increase your baby's risk of congenital heart defects such as tricuspid atresia, but the cause of congenital heart disease is usually unknown.
Your heart is divided into four chambers — the right atrium and right ventricle and left atrium and left ventricle. The right side of the heart moves blood to the lungs, where it picks up oxygen before it circulates to your heart's left side. The left side pumps blood into a large vessel called the aorta, which circulates the oxygen-rich blood to the rest of your body.
Valves control the flow of blood into and out of your heart. These valves open to allow blood to move to the next chamber or one of the arteries, and they close to keep blood from flowing backward.
In tricuspid atresia, the right side of the heart can't pump enough blood to the lungs because the tricuspid valve is missing. A sheet of tissue blocks the flow of blood from the right atrium to the right ventricle. As a result, the right ventricle is usually small and underdeveloped (hypoplastic).
Blood instead flows from the right atrium to the left atrium through a hole in the wall between them (septum). This hole is either a heart defect (atrial septal defect) or an enlarged natural opening that's supposed to close soon after birth (patent foramen ovale or patent ductus arteriosus). A baby with tricuspid atresia might need medication to keep the natural opening from closing after birth or surgery to create an opening.
Many babies born with tricuspid atresia have a hole between the ventricles (ventricular septal defect). In these cases, some blood can flow through the hole between the left ventricle and the right ventricle, and then blood is pumped to the lungs through the pulmonary artery.
However, the valve between the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery (pulmonary valve) might be narrowed, which can reduce blood flow to the lungs. If the pulmonary valve isn't narrowed and if the ventricular septal defect is large, too much blood can flow to the lungs, which can lead to heart failure.
Some babies may have other heart defects as well.
In most cases, the cause of a congenital heart defect, such as tricuspid atresia, is unknown. However, several factors might increase the risk of a baby being born with a congenital heart defect, including: A mother who had German measles (rubella) or another viral illness during early pregnancy, A parent who has a congenital heart defect, Older parental age at conception, Mother's obesity, Drinking alcohol during pregnancy, Smoking before or during pregnancy, A mother who has poorly controlled diabetes, Use of some types of medications during pregnancy, such as the acne drug isotretinoin (Claravis, Amnesteem, others), some anti-seizure medications and some bipolar disorder medications, The presence of Down syndrome, a genetic condition that results from an extra 21st chromosome.
A life-threatening complication of tricuspid atresia is a lack of oxygen to your baby's tissues (hypoxemia).
Although treatment greatly improves the outcome for babies with tricuspid atresia, complications can develop later in life, including: Formation of blood clots that can lead to a clot blocking an artery in the lungs (pulmonary embolism) or cause a stroke, Easy tiring when participating in activity or exercise, Heart rhythm abnormalities (arrhythmias), Kidney or liver disease.
Tricuspid valve regurgitation often doesn't cause signs or symptoms until the condition is severe. You may be diagnosed with this condition when having tests for other conditions.
Noticeable signs and symptoms of tricuspid valve regurgitation may include: Fatigue, Declining exercise capacity, Swelling in your abdomen, legs or veins in your neck, Abnormal heart rhythms, Pulsing in your neck, Shortness of breath with activity.
You may also notice signs or symptoms of the underlying condition that's causing tricuspid valve regurgitation, such as pulmonary hypertension. Pulmonary hypertension symptoms may include fatigue, weakness, difficulty exercising and shortness of breath.
Severe tricuspid valve regurgitation can result in right-sided heart failure. If you have signs or symptoms of right-sided heart failure — such as feeling easily fatigued or short of breath, even with normal activity — see your doctor. Your doctor may refer you to a doctor trained in heart conditions (cardiologist).
Tricuspid valve regurgitation can be caused by a number of conditions.
Tricuspid valve regurgitation is usually caused by the lower right heart chamber (right ventricle) increasing in size, which can cause the tricuspid valve to stop working properly. Several conditions that affect the right ventricle, such as heart failure; conditions that cause high blood pressure in the arteries in your lungs (pulmonary hypertension); or an abnormal heart muscle condition (cardiomyopathy) also may cause the tricuspid valve to stop working properly.
Tricuspid valve regurgitation can also occur with heart conditions that affect the left side of the heart, such as left-sided heart failure that leads to right-sided heart failure.
Tricuspid valve regurgitation can also be caused by valve problems due to:
Ebstein's anomaly. In this rare condition, the malformed tricuspid valve sits lower than normal in the right ventricle, and the tricuspid valve's leaflets are abnormally formed. This can lead to blood leaking backward (regurgitating) into the right atrium.
Tricuspid valve regurgitation in children is usually caused by heart disease present at birth (congenital heart disease). Ebstein's anomaly is the most common congenital heart disease that causes the condition. Tricuspid valve regurgitation in children may often be overlooked and not diagnosed until adulthood.
Infective endocarditis. The tricuspid valve may be damaged by an infection of the lining of the heart (infective endocarditis) that can involve heart valves.
Carcinoid syndrome. In this rare condition, tumors that develop in your digestive system and spread to your liver or lymph nodes produce a hormonelike substance that can damage heart valves, most commonly the tricuspid valve and pulmonary valves.
Implantable device wires (leads). Pacemaker or implantable cardioverter-defibrillator wires can sometimes cause injury to the tricuspid valve during placement or removal of the implantable device.
Endomyocardial biopsy. In an endomyocardial biopsy, a small amount of heart muscle tissue is removed and tested for signs of inflammation or infection. Valve damage can sometimes occur during this procedure.
Blunt chest trauma. Experiencing trauma to your chest, such as in a car accident, can lead to tricuspid valve regurgitation.
Rheumatic fever. Rheumatic fever is a complication of untreated strep throat that can damage heart valves, including the tricuspid valve, leading to tricuspid valve regurgitation later in life.
Congenital heart defects. Some heart defects present at birth (congenital) may affect the tricuspid valve. Most commonly this is Ebstein's anomaly.
Marfan syndrome. Marfan syndrome, a genetic disorder of connective tissue present at birth, is occasionally associated with tricuspid valve regurgitation.
Radiation. Chest radiation may damage the tricuspid valve and cause tricuspid valve regurgitation.
Your heart, the center of your circulatory system, is made up of four chambers. The two upper chambers (atria) receive blood. The two lower chambers (ventricles) pump blood.
Four heart valves open and close to let blood flow in one direction through your heart. The tricuspid valve — which lies between the two chambers on the right side of your heart — consists of three flaps of tissue called leaflets.
The tricuspid valve opens when blood flows from the right atrium to the right ventricle. Then the flaps close to prevent the blood that has just passed into the right ventricle from flowing backward.
In tricuspid valve regurgitation, the tricuspid valve doesn't close tightly. This causes the blood to flow back into the right atrium during each heartbeat.
Several factors can increase your risk of tricuspid valve regurgitation, including:
Infections such as infective endocarditis or rheumatic fever. These infections can cause damage to the tricuspid valve.
A heart attack. A heart attack can damage your heart and affect the right ventricle and function of the tricuspid valve.
Heart failure. Heart failure can increase your risk of developing tricuspid valve regurgitation.
Pulmonary hypertension. High blood pressure in the arteries in your lungs (pulmonary hypertension) can increase your risk of tricuspid valve regurgitation.
Heart disease. Several forms of heart disease and heart valve disease may increase your risk of developing tricuspid valve regurgitation.
Congenital heart disease. You may be born with a condition or heart defect that affects your tricuspid valve, such as Ebstein's anomaly.
Use of certain medications. If you've used stimulant medications such as fenfluramine (no longer sold on the market) or some medications for Parkinson's disease, such as pergolide (no longer sold in the United States) or cabergoline, or certain migraine medications (ergot alkaloids), you may have an increased risk of tricuspid valve regurgitation.
Radiation. Chest radiation may damage the tricuspid valve and cause tricuspid valve regurgitation.
If tricuspid valve regurgitation lasts, it can lead to:
Heart failure. In severe tricuspid valve regurgitation, pressure can rise in your right ventricle due to blood flowing backward into the right atrium and less blood flowing forward through the right ventricle and into the lungs. Your right ventricle can expand and weaken over time, leading to heart failure.
Atrial fibrillation. Some people with severe tricuspid valve regurgitation also may have a common heart rhythm disorder called atrial fibrillation.
Trigeminal neuralgia symptoms may include one or more of these patterns: Episodes of severe, shooting or jabbing pain that may feel like an electric shock, Spontaneous attacks of pain or attacks triggered by things such as touching the face, chewing, speaking or brushing teeth, Bouts of pain lasting from a few seconds to several minutes, Episodes of several attacks lasting days, weeks, months or longer — some people have periods when they experience no pain, Constant aching, burning feeling that may occur before it evolves into the spasm-like pain of trigeminal neuralgia, Pain in areas supplied by the trigeminal nerve, including the cheek, jaw, teeth, gums, lips, or less often the eye and forehead, Pain affecting one side of the face at a time, though may rarely affect both sides of the face, Pain focused in one spot or spread in a wider pattern, Attacks that become more frequent and intense over time.
If you experience facial pain, particularly prolonged or recurring pain or pain unrelieved by over-the-counter pain relievers, see your doctor.
In trigeminal neuralgia, also called tic douloureux, the trigeminal nerve's function is disrupted. Usually, the problem is contact between a normal blood vessel — in this case, an artery or a vein — and the trigeminal nerve at the base of your brain. This contact puts pressure on the nerve and causes it to malfunction.
Trigeminal neuralgia can occur as a result of aging, or it can be related to multiple sclerosis or a similar disorder that damages the myelin sheath protecting certain nerves. Trigeminal neuralgia can also be caused by a tumor compressing the trigeminal nerve.
Some people may experience trigeminal neuralgia due to a brain lesion or other abnormalities. In other cases, surgical injuries, stroke or facial trauma may be responsible for trigeminal neuralgia.
A variety of triggers may set off the pain of trigeminal neuralgia, including: Shaving, Touching your face, Eating, Drinking, Brushing your teeth, Talking, Putting on makeup, Encountering a breeze, Smiling, Washing your face.
Signs and symptoms of trigger finger may progress from mild to severe and include: Finger stiffness, particularly in the morning, A popping or clicking sensation as you move your finger, Tenderness or a bump (nodule) in the palm at the base of the affected finger, Finger catching or locking in a bent position, which suddenly pops straight, Finger locked in a bent position, which you are unable to straighten.
Trigger finger can affect any finger, including the thumb. More than one finger may be affected at a time, and both hands might be involved. Triggering is usually more pronounced in the morning, while firmly grasping an object or when straightening your finger.
Seek immediate medical care if your finger joint is hot and inflamed, as these signs may indicate an infection.
If you have any stiffness, catching, numbness or pain in a finger joint, or if you can't straighten or bend a finger, make an appointment with your doctor.
Tendons are fibrous cords that attach muscle to bone. Each tendon is surrounded by a protective sheath. Trigger finger occurs when the affected finger's tendon sheath becomes irritated and inflamed. This interferes with the normal gliding motion of the tendon through the sheath.
Prolonged irritation of the tendon sheath can produce scarring, thickening and the formation of bumps (nodules) in the tendon that impede the tendon's motion even more.
Factors that put you at risk of developing trigger finger include:
Repeated gripping. Occupations and hobbies that involve repetitive hand use and prolonged gripping may increase your risk of trigger finger.
Certain health problems. People who have diabetes or rheumatoid arthritis are at higher risk of developing trigger finger.
Your sex. Trigger finger is more common in women.
Carpal tunnel syndrome surgery. Trigger finger may be a complication associated with surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome surgery, especially during the first six months after surgery.
Signs and symptoms can vary greatly among girls and women with triple X syndrome. Many experience no noticeable effects or have only mild symptoms.
Being taller than average height is the most typical physical feature. Most females with triple X syndrome experience normal sexual development and have the ability to become pregnant. Some girls and women with triple X syndrome have intelligence in the normal range, but possibly slightly lower when compared with siblings. Others may have intellectual disabilities and sometimes may have behavioral problems.
Occasionally significant symptoms may occur. If signs and symptoms are present, they are often variable. Signs and symptoms in girls and women with triple X syndrome may include an increased risk of: Delayed development of speech and language skills, as well as motor skills, such as sitting up and walking, Learning disabilities, such as difficulty with reading (dyslexia), understanding or math, Behavioral problems, such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or symptoms of autism spectrum disorder, Psychological problems, such as anxiety and depression, Problems with fine and gross motor skills, memory, judgment and information processing.
Sometimes triple X syndrome may be associated with these signs and symptoms: Vertical folds of skin that cover the inner corners of the eyes (epicanthal folds), Widely spaced eyes, Abnormally curved pinky fingers, Flat feet, Abnormally shaped breastbone, Weak muscle tone (hypotonia), Seizures, Kidney abnormalities, Premature ovarian failure or ovary abnormalities, Developmental delays.
If you're concerned about your child's development, make an appointment to talk with your family doctor or pediatrician. Your doctor can help determine the cause and suggest appropriate action.
Although triple X syndrome is genetic, it's usually not inherited — it's due to a random genetic error.
Normally, people have 46 chromosomes in each cell, organized into 23 pairs, including two sex chromosomes. One set of chromosomes is from the mother and the other set is from the father. These chromosomes contain genes, which carry instructions that determine everything from height to eye color.
The pair of sex chromosomes — either XX or XY — determines a child's sex. A mother can give the child only an X chromosome, but a father can pass on an X or a Y chromosome:
If the child receives an X chromosome from the father, the XX pair makes the child genetically a female.
If the child receives a Y chromosome from the father, the XY pair means the child is genetically a male.
Females with triple X syndrome have a third X chromosome from a random error in cell division. This error can happen before conception or early in the embryo's development, resulting in one of these forms of triple X syndrome:
Nondisjunction. In most cases, either the mother's egg cell or the father's sperm cell divides incorrectly, resulting in an extra X chromosome in the child. This random error is called nondisjunction, and all the cells in the child's body will have the extra X chromosome.
Mosaic. Occasionally, the extra chromosome results from an incorrect cell division caused by a random event early in the embryo's development. If this is the case, the child has a mosaic form of triple X syndrome, and only some cells have the extra X chromosome. Females with the mosaic form may have less obvious symptoms.
Triple X syndrome is also called 47,XXX syndrome because the extra X chromosome results in 47 chromosomes in each cell instead of the usual 46.
Although some females may have mild or no symptoms associated with triple X syndrome, other girls and women experience developmental, psychological and behavioral problems that may lead to a variety of other issues, including: Work, school, social and relationship problems, Poor self-esteem, Need for additional support or assistance with learning, activities of daily living, school or work.
Signs and symptoms of truncus arteriosus often develop in the first few days of life. They include: Blue coloring of the skin (cyanosis), Poor feeding, Pounding heart, Excessive sleepiness, Poor growth, Shortness of breath (dyspnea), Rapid breathing (tachypnea).
Seek medical treatment if you notice that your baby has any of the following problems: Blue coloring of the skin (cyanosis), Poor feeding, Excessive sleepiness.
Some signs of truncus arteriosus may indicate a problem that needs urgent care. If your baby experiences any of the following signs and symptoms and you can't see your baby's doctor immediately, seek emergency medical care: Rapid, shallow or labored breathing, Worsening of blue coloring of the skin, Loss of consciousness.
Truncus arteriosus occurs during fetal growth when your baby's heart is developing and is, therefore, present at birth (congenital). In most cases the cause is unknown.
An overview of the typical heart structure and function is helpful in understanding the defects of truncus arteriosus.
Your heart has four pumping chambers that circulate your blood. The "doors" of the chambers (valves) control the flow of blood, opening and closing to ensure that blood flows in a single direction.
The heart's four chambers are:
The right atrium, the upper right chamber, receives oxygen-poor blood from your body and delivers it into the right ventricle.
The right ventricle, the lower right chamber, pumps the blood through a large vessel called the pulmonary artery and into the lungs, where the blood is resupplied with oxygen.
The left atrium, the upper left chamber, receives the oxygen-rich blood from the lungs and delivers it into the left ventricle.
The left ventricle, the lower left chamber, pumps the oxygen-rich blood through a large vessel called the aorta and on to the rest of the body.
The formation of the fetal heart is a complex process. At a certain point, all babies have a single large vessel (truncus arteriosus) exiting the heart. During normal development of the heart, however, this very large single vessel divides into two parts.
One part becomes the lower portion of the aorta, which is attached to the left ventricle. The other part becomes the lower portion of the pulmonary artery, which is attached to the right ventricle.
Also during this process, the ventricles develop into two chambers separated by a wall (septum).
In babies born with truncus arteriosus, the single large vessel never finished dividing into two separate vessels. And the wall separating the two ventricles never closed completely, resulting in a single blood vessel arising from the heart, and a large hole between the two chambers (ventricular septal defect).
In addition to the primary defects of truncus arteriosus, the valve controlling blood flow from the ventricles to the singe large vessel (truncal valve) is often defective, allowing blood to flow backward into the heart.
While the exact cause of congenital heart defects, such as truncus arteriosus, is unknown, several factors may increase the risk of a baby being born with a heart condition. These include:
Viral illness during pregnancy. If a woman contracts rubella (German measles) or another viral illness during early pregnancy, the risk of congenital heart defects in her baby is increased.
Poorly controlled diabetes during pregnancy. Diabetes that isn't well-managed can increase the risk of birth defects, including heart defects.
Certain medications taken during pregnancy. Many medications aren't recommended for use during pregnancy because of potential risks to the fetus.
Certain chromosomal disorders. Children with DiGeorge's syndrome or velocardiofacial syndrome have an increased risk of truncus arteriosus. These conditions are caused by an extra or defective chromosome.
Smoking during pregnancy. Continuing to smoke while pregnant increases the risk that the baby will be born with a heart defect.
The abnormal heart structures of truncus arteriosus result in severe problems with blood circulation.
Because the ventricles aren't separated and all blood exits from a single vessel, the oxygen-rich blood and the oxygen-poor blood mix together — resulting in blood that doesn't carry enough oxygen. The mixed blood flows from the single large vessel to the lungs, the arteries of the heart and the rest of the body.
If your baby has truncus arteriosus, the abnormal circulation of blood usually results in:
Respiratory problems. The abnormal distribution of blood results in too much blood flowing into the lungs. Excessive fluid in the lungs makes it difficult for your baby to breathe.
High blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension). Increased blood flow to the lungs causes the lungs' blood vessels to narrow, increasing blood pressure in the lungs and making it increasingly difficult for your baby's heart to pump blood into the lungs.
Enlargement of the heart (cardiomegaly). Pulmonary hypertension and the increased blood flow through the heart force your baby's heart to work harder than normal, causing it to enlarge. The enlarged heart gradually weakens.
Heart failure. The increased workload and poor oxygen supply also result in weakening of your baby's heart. These factors can contribute to heart failure, the inability of the heart to supply the body with enough blood.
Even with successful surgical repair of the heart during infancy, other complications associated with truncus arteriosus may occur later in life: Progressive pulmonary hypertension, Leaky heart valves (regurgitation), Heart rhythm disturbances (arrhythmias), Problems related to prior operation.
Common signs and symptoms of these complications include shortness of breath when exercising, dizziness, fatigue, abdominal swelling, swelling in the legs and feet, and a sensation of rapid, fluttering heartbeats (palpitations).
In rare cases, a person with truncus arteriosus can survive infancy without surgical repair of the heart and live into adulthood. However, people with this condition will almost certainly develop heart failure and pulmonary hypertension (Eisenmenger syndrome).
This syndrome is caused by permanent lung damage from pulmonary hypertension that results in much of the blood flow bypassing the lungs entirely.
Although your body may harbor the bacteria that cause tuberculosis (TB), your immune system usually can prevent you from becoming sick. For this reason, doctors make a distinction between:
Latent TB. In this condition, you have a TB infection, but the bacteria remain in your body in an inactive state and cause no symptoms. Latent TB, also called inactive TB or TB infection, isn't contagious. It can turn into active TB, so treatment is important for the person with latent TB and to help control the spread of TB. An estimated 2 billion people have latent TB.
Active TB. This condition makes you sick and in most cases can spread to others. It can occur in the first few weeks after infection with the TB bacteria, or it might occur years later.
Signs and symptoms of active TB include: Coughing that lasts three or more weeks, Coughing up blood, Chest pain, or pain with breathing or coughing, Unintentional weight loss, Fatigue, Fever, Night sweats, Chills, Loss of appetite.
Tuberculosis can also affect other parts of your body, including your kidneys, spine or brain. When TB occurs outside your lungs, signs and symptoms vary according to the organs involved. For example, tuberculosis of the spine may give you back pain, and tuberculosis in your kidneys might cause blood in your urine.
See your doctor if you have a fever, unexplained weight loss, drenching night sweats or a persistent cough. These are often signs of TB, but they can also result from other medical problems. Your doctor can perform tests to help determine the cause.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that people who have an increased risk of tuberculosis be screened for latent TB infection. This recommendation includes people who: Have HIV/AIDS, Use IV drugs, Are in contact with infected individuals, Are from a country where TB is common, such as several countries in Latin America, Africa and Asia, Live or work in areas where TB is common, such as prisons or nursing homes, Work in health care and treat people with a high risk of TB, Are children and are exposed to adults at risk of TB.
Tuberculosis is caused by bacteria that spread from person to person through microscopic droplets released into the air. This can happen when someone with the untreated, active form of tuberculosis coughs, speaks, sneezes, spits, laughs or sings.
Although tuberculosis is contagious, it's not easy to catch. You're much more likely to get tuberculosis from someone you live with or work with than from a stranger. Most people with active TB who've had appropriate drug treatment for at least two weeks are no longer contagious.
Since the 1980s, the number of cases of tuberculosis has increased dramatically because of the spread of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. Infection with HIV suppresses the immune system, making it difficult for the body to control TB bacteria. As a result, people with HIV are many times more likely to get TB and to progress from latent to active disease than are people who aren't HIV positive.
Another reason tuberculosis remains a major killer is the increase in drug-resistant strains of the bacterium. Since the first antibiotics were used to fight tuberculosis more than 60 years ago, some TB germs have developed the ability to survive despite medications, and that ability gets passed on to their descendants.
Drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis emerge when an antibiotic fails to kill all of the bacteria it targets. The surviving bacteria become resistant to that particular drug and frequently other antibiotics as well. Some TB bacteria have developed resistance to the most commonly used treatments, such as isoniazid and rifampin.
Some strains of TB have also developed resistance to drugs less commonly used in TB treatment, such as the antibiotics known as fluoroquinolones, and injectable medications including amikacin and capreomycin (Capastat). These medications are often used to treat infections that are resistant to the more commonly used drugs.
Anyone can get tuberculosis, but certain factors can increase your risk of the disease. These factors include:
A healthy immune system often successfully fights TB bacteria, but your body can't mount an effective defense if your resistance is low. A number of diseases, conditions and medications can weaken your immune system, including: HIV/AIDS, Diabetes, Severe kidney disease, Certain cancers, Cancer treatment, such as chemotherapy, Drugs to prevent rejection of transplanted organs, Some drugs used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn's disease and psoriasis, Malnutrition, Very young or advanced age.
The risk of contracting tuberculosis is higher for people who live in or travel to areas that have high rates of tuberculosis and drug-resistant tuberculosis, including: Africa, Eastern Europe, Asia, Russia, Latin America, Caribbean Islands.
Lack of medical care. If you receive a low or fixed income, live in a remote area, have recently immigrated to the United States, or are homeless, you may lack access to the medical care needed to diagnose and treat TB.
Substance use. Use of IV drugs or excessive alcohol weakens your immune system and makes you more vulnerable to tuberculosis.
Tobacco use. Using tobacco greatly increases the risk of getting TB and dying of it.
Health care work. Regular contact with people who are ill increases your chances of exposure to TB bacteria. Wearing a mask and frequent hand-washing greatly reduce your risk.
Living or working in a residential care facility. People who live or work in prisons, homeless shelters, psychiatric hospitals or nursing homes are all at a higher risk of tuberculosis. That's because the risk of the disease is higher anywhere there is overcrowding and poor ventilation.
Living in or emigrating from a country where TB is common. People from a country where TB is common may be at high risk of tuberculosis infection.
Living with someone infected with TB. Living with someone who has TB increases your risk.
Without treatment, tuberculosis can be fatal. Untreated active disease typically affects your lungs, but it can spread to other parts of your body through your bloodstream. Examples of tuberculosis complications include:
Spinal pain. Back pain and stiffness are common complications of tuberculosis.
Joint damage. Tuberculous arthritis usually affects the hips and knees.
Swelling of the membranes that cover your brain (meningitis). This can cause a lasting or intermittent headache that occurs for weeks. Mental changes also are possible.
Liver or kidney problems. Your liver and kidneys help filter waste and impurities from your bloodstream. These functions become impaired if the liver or kidneys are affected by tuberculosis.
Heart disorders. Rarely, tuberculosis can infect the tissues that surround your heart, causing inflammation and fluid collections that may interfere with your heart's ability to pump effectively. This condition, called cardiac tamponade, can be fatal.
Tuberous sclerosis symptoms are caused by noncancerous growths (benign tumors), in parts of the body, most commonly in the brain, eyes, kidneys, heart, lungs and skin, although any part of the body can be affected. Symptoms can range from mild to severe, depending on the size or location of the overgrowth.
Although the signs and symptoms are unique for each person with tuberous sclerosis, they can include:
Skin abnormalities. Most people with tuberous sclerosis have patches of light-colored skin, or they may develop small, harmless areas of thickened, smooth skin or reddish bumps under or around the nails. Facial growths that begin in childhood and resemble acne also are common.
Seizures. Growths in the brain may be associated with seizures, which can be the first symptom of tuberous sclerosis. In small children, a common type of seizure called infantile spasm shows up as repetitive spasms of the head and legs.
Cognitive disabilities. Tuberous sclerosis can be associated with developmental delays and sometimes intellectual disability or learning disabilities. Mental health disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), also can occur.
Behavioral problems. Common behavioral problems may include hyperactivity, self-injury or aggression, or issues with social and emotional adjustment.
Kidney problems. Most people with tuberous sclerosis develop noncancerous growths on their kidneys, and they may develop more growths as they age.
Heart issues. Growths in the heart, if present, are usually largest at birth and shrink as the child gets older.
Lung problems. Growths that develop in the lungs may cause coughing or shortness of breath, especially with physical activity or exercise. These benign lung tumors occur more often in women than in men.
Eye abnormalities. Growths can appear as white patches on the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (retina). These noncancerous growths don't always interfere with vision.
Signs and symptoms of tuberous sclerosis may be noticed at birth. Or the first signs and symptoms may become evident during childhood or even years later in adulthood.
Contact your child's doctor if you're concerned about your child's development or you notice any of the signs or symptoms of tuberous sclerosis described above.
Signs and symptoms of tuberous sclerosis may be noticed at birth. Or the first signs and symptoms may become evident during childhood or even years later in adulthood.
Contact your child's doctor if you're concerned about your child's development or you notice any of the signs or symptoms of tuberous sclerosis described above.
Tuberous sclerosis can be the result of either:
A random cell division error. About two-thirds of people who have tuberous sclerosis have a new mutation in either the TSC1 or TSC2 gene — the genes associated with tuberous sclerosis — and do not have a family history of tuberous sclerosis.
Inheritance. About one-third of people who have tuberous sclerosis inherit an altered TSC1 or TSC2 gene from a parent who has the disorder.
If you have tuberous sclerosis, you have up to a 50 percent chance of passing the condition to your biological children. Severity of the condition may vary. A parent with tuberous sclerosis may have a child who has a milder or more severe form of the disorder.
Depending on where the noncancerous growths (benign tumors), develop and their size, they can cause severe or life-threatening complications in people with tuberous sclerosis. Here are some examples of complications:
Excess fluid in and around the brain. One type of brain growth can block the flow of cerebral spinal fluid within the brain. This blockage can cause the buildup of fluid in the cavities (ventricles) deep within the brain, a condition called hydrocephalus. Various signs and symptoms include an unexpectedly large head size, nausea, headaches and behavior changes.
Heart complications. Growths in the heart, usually in infants, can block blood flow or cause problems with heart rhythm (dysrhythmia).
Kidney damage. Growths in the kidney can be large and cause potentially serious — even life-threatening — kidney problems. Growths in the kidney can cause high blood pressure or bleeding or lead to kidney failure. Rarely, kidney growths can become cancerous.
Lung failure. Growths in the lungs can lead to a collapsed lung or fluid around the lungs that interferes with lung function.
Increased risk of cancerous (malignant) tumors. Tuberous sclerosis is associated with an increased risk of developing malignant tumors in the kidneys and brain.
Vison damage. Growths in the eye can interfere with vision if they block too much of the retina, though this is rare.
Most people exposed to tularemia who become sick generally do so within three to five days, although it can take as long as 14 days. Several types of tularemia exist, and which type you get depends on how and where the bacteria enter the body. Each type of tularemia has its own set of symptoms.
This is the most common form of the disease. Signs and symptoms include: A skin ulcer that forms at the site of infection — usually an insect or animal bite, Swollen and painful lymph glands, Fever, Chills, Headache, Exhaustion.
People with glandular tularemia have the same signs and symptoms of ulceroglandular tularemia, but without skin ulcers.
This form affects the eyes and may cause: Eye pain, Eye redness, Eye swelling and discharge, An ulcer on the inside of the eyelid, Sensitivity to light.
Usually caused by eating poorly cooked wild animal meat or drinking contaminated water, this form affects the mouth, throat and digestive tract. Signs and symptoms include: Fever, Throat pain, Mouth ulcers, Vomiting, Diarrhea, Inflamed tonsils, Swollen lymph nodes in the neck.
This type of tularemia causes signs and symptoms typical of pneumonia: Dry cough, Chest pain, Difficulty breathing.
Other forms of tularemia also can spread to the lungs.
This rare and serious form of the disease usually causes: High fever, Extreme exhaustion, Vomiting and diarrhea, Enlarged spleen (splenomegaly), Enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), Pneumonia.
If you think you may have been exposed to tularemia — especially if you've been bitten by a tick or handled a wild animal in an area where tularemia is found and have developed fever, skin ulcers or swollen glands — see a doctor as soon as possible.
Tularemia doesn't occur naturally in humans and isn't known to pass from person to person. However, tularemia occurs worldwide, especially in rural areas, because many mammals, birds and insects are infected with F. tularensis. The organism can live for weeks in soil, water and dead animals.
Unlike some infectious diseases that spread from animals to people through a single route, tularemia has several modes of transmission. How you get the disease usually determines the type and severity of symptoms. In general, you can get tularemia through:
Insect bites. Although a number of insects carry tularemia, ticks and deer flies are most likely to transmit the disease to humans. Tick bites cause a large percentage of cases of ulceroglandular tularemia.
Exposure to sick or dead animals. Ulceroglandular tularemia can also result from handling or being bitten by an infected animal, most often a rabbit or hare. Bacteria enter the skin through small cuts and abrasions or a bite, and an ulcer forms at the wound site. The ocular form of tularemia can occur when you rub your eyes after touching an infected animal.
Airborne bacteria. Bacteria in the soil can become airborne during gardening, construction or other activities that disturb the earth. Inhaling the bacteria can lead to pneumonic tularemia. Laboratory workers who work with tularemia also are at risk of airborne infection.
Contaminated food or water. Although uncommon, it's possible to get tularemia from eating undercooked meat of an infected animal or drinking contaminated water. The signs include vomiting, diarrhea and other digestive problems (oropharyngeal tularemia).
Heat kills F. tularensis, so cook meat to the right temperature — a minimum of 165 F (73.8 C) for ground meat and game meat — to make it safe to eat.
Although anyone of any age can develop tularemia, engaging in certain occupations or activities or living in certain areas pose a greater risk.
Tularemia has been reported in the United States, Canada, Mexico, Japan and Europe. In the United States, it's most common in the south-central states, the Pacific Northwest and parts of Massachusetts, including Martha's Vineyard.
The following can increase your risk of developing tularemia:
Hunting and trapping. Because hunters are exposed to wild animal blood and may eat their flesh, they're at risk of tularemia.
Gardening or landscaping. Gardeners and landscapers may also be at risk of tularemia. It's possible that gardeners inhale bacteria that are stirred up while working the soil or when using mowers and weed trimmers.
Working in wildlife management or veterinary medicine. People who work with wildlife are at increased risk of tularemia.
Left untreated, tularemia can be fatal. Other possible complications include:
Inflammation of the lungs (pneumonia). Pneumonia can lead to respiratory failure — a condition in which the lungs don't take in enough oxygen, don't release enough carbon dioxide or both.
Infection around the brain and spinal cord (meningitis). Meningitis is a serious and sometimes life-threatening infection of the fluid and membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord.
Irritation around the heart (pericarditis). This is swelling and irritation of the pericardium, the thin membrane that surrounds the heart. Mild pericarditis may improve without treatment, but more-serious cases may require antibiotic therapy.
Bone infection (osteomyelitis). Tularemia bacteria sometimes spread to the bones.
Signs and symptoms of Turner syndrome may vary among girls and women with the disorder. For some girls, the presence of Turner syndrome may not be readily apparent, but in other girls, a number of physical features and poor growth are apparent early. Signs and symptoms can be subtle, developing slowly over time, or significant, such as heart defects.
Turner syndrome may be suspected prenatally based on prenatal cell-free DNA screening ― a method to screen for certain chromosomal abnormalities in a developing baby using a blood sample from the mother ― or prenatal ultrasound. Prenatal ultrasound of a baby with Turner syndrome may show: Large fluid collection on the back of the neck or other abnormal fluid collections (edema), Heart abnormalities, Abnormal kidneys.
Signs of Turner syndrome at birth or during infancy may include: Wide or weblike neck, Low-set ears, Broad chest with widely spaced nipples, High, narrow roof of the mouth (palate), Arms that turn outward at the elbows, Fingernails and toenails that are narrow and turned upward, Swelling of the hands and feet, especially at birth, Slightly smaller than average height at birth, Slowed growth, Cardiac defects, Low hairline at the back of the head, Receding or small lower jaw, Short fingers and toes.
The most common signs in almost all girls, teenagers and young women with Turner syndrome are short stature and ovarian insufficiency due to ovarian failure that may have occurred by birth or gradually during childhood, the teen years or young adulthood. Signs and symptoms of these include: Slowed growth, No growth spurts at expected times in childhood, Adult height significantly less than might be expected for a female member of the family, Failure to begin sexual changes expected during puberty, Sexual development that "stalls" during teenage years, Early end to menstrual cycles not due to pregnancy, For most women with Turner syndrome, inability to conceive a child without fertility treatment.
Sometimes it's difficult to distinguish the signs and symptoms of Turner syndrome from other disorders. It's important to get a prompt, accurate diagnosis and appropriate care. See your doctor if you have concerns about physical or sexual development.
Most people are born with two sex chromosomes. Boys inherit the X chromosome from their mothers and the Y chromosome from their fathers. Girls inherit one X chromosome from each parent. In girls who have Turner syndrome, one copy of the X chromosome is missing, partially missing or altered.
The genetic alterations of Turner syndrome may be one of the following:
Monosomy. The complete absence of an X chromosome generally occurs because of an error in the father's sperm or in the mother's egg. This results in every cell in the body having only one X chromosome.
Mosaicism. In some cases, an error occurs in cell division during early stages of fetal development. This results in some cells in the body having two complete copies of the X chromosome. Other cells have only one copy of the X chromosome.
X chromosome abnormalities. Abnormal or missing parts of one of the X chromosomes can occur. Cells have one complete and one altered copy. This error can occur in the sperm or egg with all cells having one complete and one altered copy. Or the error can occur in cell division in early fetal development so that only some cells contain the abnormal or missing parts of one of the X chromosomes (mosaicism).
Y chromosome material. In a small percentage of Turner syndrome cases, some cells have one copy of the X chromosome and other cells have one copy of the X chromosome and some Y chromosome material. These individuals develop biologically as female, but the presence of Y chromosome material increases the risk of developing a type of cancer called gonadoblastoma.
The missing or altered X chromosome of Turner syndrome causes errors during fetal development and other developmental problems after birth — for example, short stature, ovarian insufficiency and heart defects. Physical characteristics and health complications that arise from the chromosomal error vary greatly.
The loss or alteration of the X chromosome occurs randomly. Sometimes, it's because of a problem with the sperm or the egg, and other times, the loss or alteration of the X chromosome happens early in fetal development.
Family history doesn't seem to be a risk factor, so it's unlikely that parents of one child with Turner syndrome will have another child with the disorder.
Turner syndrome can affect the proper development of several body systems, but varies greatly among individuals with the syndrome. Complications that can occur include:
Heart problems. Many infants with Turner syndrome are born with heart defects or even slight abnormalities in heart structure that increase their risk of serious complications. Heart defects often include problems with the aorta, the large blood vessel that branches off the heart and delivers oxygen-rich blood to the body.
High blood pressure. Women with Turner syndrome have an increased risk of high blood pressure — a condition that increases the risk of developing diseases of the heart and blood vessels.
Hearing loss. Hearing loss is common with Turner syndrome. In some cases, this is due to the gradual loss of nerve function. An increased risk of frequent middle ear infections can also result in hearing loss.
Vision problems. Girls with Turner syndrome have an increased risk of weak muscle control of eye movements (strabismus), nearsightedness and other vision problems.
Kidney problems. Girls with Turner syndrome may have some malformation of the kidneys. Although these abnormalities generally don't cause medical problems, they may increase the risk of high blood pressure and urinary tract infections.
Autoimmune disorders. Girls and women with Turner syndrome have an increased risk of an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) due to the autoimmune disorder Hashimoto's thyroiditis. They also have an increased risk of diabetes. Some women with Turner syndrome have gluten intolerance (celiac disease) or inflammatory bowel disease.
Skeletal problems. Problems with the growth and development of bones increase the risk of abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis) and forward rounding of the upper back (kyphosis). Women with Turner syndrome are also at increased risk of developing weak, brittle bones (osteoporosis).
Learning disabilities. Girls and women with Turner syndrome usually have normal intelligence. However, there is increased risk of learning disabilities, particularly with learning that involves spatial concepts, math, memory and attention.
Mental health issues. Girls and women with Turner syndrome may have difficulties functioning well in social situations and have an increased risk of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Infertility. Most women with Turner syndrome are infertile. However, a very small number of women may become pregnant spontaneously, and some can become pregnant with fertility treatment.
Pregnancy complications. Because women with Turner syndrome are at increased risk of complications during pregnancy, such as high blood pressure and aortic dissection, they should be evaluated by a cardiologist before pregnancy.
The signs and symptoms of type 1 diabetes in children usually develop quickly, and may include: Increased thirst, Frequent urination, possibly bed-wetting in a toilet-trained child, Extreme hunger, Unintentional weight loss, Fatigue, Irritability or behavior changes, Fruity-smelling breath.
See your child's doctor if you notice any of the signs or symptoms of type 1 diabetes.
The exact cause of type 1 diabetes is unknown. But in most people with type 1 diabetes, the body's immune system — which normally fights harmful bacteria and viruses — mistakenly destroys insulin-producing (islet) cells in the pancreas. Genetics and environmental factors appear to play a role in this process.
Once the islet cells of the pancreas are destroyed, your child produces little or no insulin. Insulin performs the critical job of moving sugar (glucose) from the bloodstream to the body's cells. Sugar enters the bloodstream when food is digested.
Without enough insulin, sugar builds up in your child's bloodstream, where it can cause life-threatening complications if left untreated.
Risk factors for type 1 diabetes in children include:
Family history. Anyone with a parent or siblings with type 1 diabetes has a slightly increased risk of developing the condition.
Genetics. Certain genes indicate an increased risk of type 1 diabetes.
Race. In the United States, type 1 diabetes is more common among white children of non-Hispanic descent than among children of other races.
Certain viruses. Exposure to various viruses may trigger the autoimmune destruction of the islet cells.
Type 1 diabetes can affect the major organs in your body. Keeping your blood sugar level close to normal most of the time can dramatically reduce the risk of many complications.
Complications can include:
Heart and blood vessel disease. Diabetes increases your child's risk of developing conditions such as narrowed blood vessels, high blood pressure, heart disease and stroke later in life.
Nerve damage. Excess sugar can injure the walls of the tiny blood vessels that nourish your child's nerves. This can cause tingling, numbness, burning or pain. Nerve damage usually happens gradually over a long period of time.
Kidney damage. Diabetes can damage the numerous tiny blood vessel clusters that filter waste from your child's blood.
Eye damage. Diabetes can damage the blood vessels of the retina, which may lead to vision problems.
Osteoporosis. Diabetes may lead to lower than normal bone mineral density, increasing your child's risk of osteoporosis as an adult.
Type 1 diabetes signs and symptoms can appear relatively suddenly and may include: Increased thirst, Frequent urination, Bed-wetting in children who previously didn't wet the bed during the night, Extreme hunger, Unintended weight loss, Irritability and other mood changes, Fatigue and weakness, Blurred vision.
Consult your doctor if you notice any of the above signs and symptoms in you or your child.
The exact cause of type 1 diabetes is unknown. Usually, the body's own immune system — which normally fights harmful bacteria and viruses — mistakenly destroys the insulin-producing (islet, or islets of Langerhans) cells in the pancreas. Other possible causes include: Genetics, Exposure to viruses and other environmental factors.
Once a significant number of islet cells are destroyed, you'll produce little or no insulin. Insulin is a hormone that comes from a gland situated behind and below the stomach (pancreas).
The pancreas secretes insulin into the bloodstream.
Insulin circulates, allowing sugar to enter your cells.
Insulin lowers the amount of sugar in your bloodstream.
As your blood sugar level drops, so does the secretion of insulin from your pancreas.
Glucose — a sugar — is a main source of energy for the cells that make up muscles and other tissues.
Glucose comes from two major sources: food and your liver.
Sugar is absorbed into the bloodstream, where it enters cells with the help of insulin.
Your liver stores glucose as glycogen.
When your glucose levels are low, such as when you haven't eaten in a while, the liver breaks down the stored glycogen into glucose to keep your glucose levels within a normal range.
In type 1 diabetes, there's no insulin to let glucose into the cells, so sugar builds up in your bloodstream. This can cause life-threatening complications.
Some known risk factors for type 1 diabetes include:
Family history. Anyone with a parent or sibling with type 1 diabetes has a slightly increased risk of developing the condition.
Genetics. The presence of certain genes indicates an increased risk of developing type 1 diabetes.
Geography. The incidence of type 1 diabetes tends to increase as you travel away from the equator.
Age. Although type 1 diabetes can appear at any age, it appears at two noticeable peaks. The first peak occurs in children between 4 and 7 years old, and the second is in children between 10 and 14 years old.
Over time, type 1 diabetes complications can affect major organs in your body, including heart, blood vessels, nerves, eyes and kidneys. Maintaining a normal blood sugar level can dramatically reduce the risk of many complications.
Eventually, diabetes complications may be disabling or even life-threatening.
Heart and blood vessel disease. Diabetes dramatically increases your risk of various cardiovascular problems, including coronary artery disease with chest pain (angina), heart attack, stroke, narrowing of the arteries (atherosclerosis) and high blood pressure.
Nerve damage (neuropathy). Excess sugar can injure the walls of the tiny blood vessels (capillaries) that nourish your nerves, especially in the legs. This can cause tingling, numbness, burning or pain that usually begins at the tips of the toes or fingers and gradually spreads upward. Poorly controlled blood sugar could cause you to eventually lose all sense of feeling in the affected limbs.
Damage to the nerves that affect the gastrointestinal tract can cause problems with nausea, vomiting, diarrhea or constipation. For men, erectile dysfunction may be an issue.
Kidney damage (nephropathy). The kidneys contain millions of tiny blood vessel clusters that filter waste from your blood. Diabetes can damage this delicate filtering system. Severe damage can lead to kidney failure or irreversible end-stage kidney disease, which requires dialysis or a kidney transplant.
Eye damage. Diabetes can damage the blood vessels of the retina (diabetic retinopathy), potentially causing blindness. Diabetes also increases the risk of other serious vision conditions, such as cataracts and glaucoma.
Foot damage. Nerve damage in the feet or poor blood flow to the feet increases the risk of various foot complications. Left untreated, cuts and blisters can become serious infections that may ultimately require toe, foot or leg amputation.
Skin and mouth conditions. Diabetes may leave you more susceptible to infections of the skin and mouth, including bacterial and fungal infections. Gum disease and dry mouth also are more likely.
Pregnancy complications. High blood sugar levels can be dangerous for both the mother and the baby. The risk of miscarriage, stillbirth and birth defects increases when diabetes isn't well-controlled. For the mother, diabetes increases the risk of diabetic ketoacidosis, diabetic eye problems (retinopathy), pregnancy-induced high blood pressure and preeclampsia.
Type 2 diabetes in children may develop so gradually that there are no noticeable symptoms. Sometimes, the disorder is diagnosed during a routine check-up.
Other children might experience:
Increased thirst and frequent urination. Excess sugar building up in your child's bloodstream pulls fluid from tissues. As a result your child might be thirsty — and drink and urinate more than usual.
Fatigue. Lack of sugar in your child's cells might make him or her exhausted.
Blurry vision. If your child's blood sugar is too high, fluid may be pulled from the lenses of your child's eyes. Your child might be unable to focus clearly.
Darkened areas of skin. Before type 2 diabetes develops, certain areas of the skin begin to darken. These areas are often found around the neck or in the armpits.
Weight loss. Without the energy that sugar supplies, muscle tissues and fat stores simply shrink. However, weight loss is less common in children with type 2 diabetes than in children with type 1 diabetes.
See your child's doctor if you notice any of the signs or symptoms of type 2 diabetes. Undiagnosed, the disease can cause serious damage.
Diabetes screening is recommended for children who are overweight or obese who have started puberty or are at least 10 years old and have at least one other risk factor for type 2 diabetes. Other risk factors include having a family history of diabetes, being a nonwhite race or having signs of insulin resistance, such as darkened skin patches on the neck or armpits.
The exact cause of type 2 diabetes is unknown. But family history and genetics appear to play an important role. Inactivity and excess fat — especially fat around the belly — also seem to be important factors.
What is clear is that people with type 2 diabetes can't process glucose properly. As a result, sugar builds up in the bloodstream instead of doing its normal job of fueling the cells that make up muscles and other tissues.
Most of the sugar in people's bodies comes from the food they eat. When food is digested, sugar enters the bloodstream. Moving sugar from the bloodstream to the body's cells requires the hormone insulin.
Insulin comes from a gland located behind the stomach called the pancreas. The pancreas releases insulin into the blood after a person eats.
As insulin circulates, it allows sugar to enter the cells — lowering the amount of sugar in the bloodstream. As the blood sugar level drops, so does the secretion of insulin from the pancreas.
Type 2 diabetes develops when the body becomes resistant to insulin or when the pancreas stops making enough insulin. The resulting buildup of sugar in the bloodstream can cause symptoms of high blood sugar.
Researchers don't fully understand why some children develop type 2 diabetes and others don't, even if they have similar risk factors. However, it's clear that certain factors increase the risk, including:
Weight. Being overweight is a strong risk factor for type 2 diabetes in children. The more fatty tissue children have — especially around the abdomen — the more resistant their bodies' cells become to insulin.
Inactivity. The less active your child is, the greater his or her risk of type 2 diabetes. Physical activity helps your child control his or her weight, uses glucose as energy, and makes your child's cells more responsive to insulin.
Family history. Children's risk of type 2 diabetes increases if they have a parent or sibling with the disease.
Race or ethnicity. Although it's unclear why, certain people — including Black, Hispanic, American Indian and Asian American people — are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes.
Age and sex. Many children develop type 2 diabetes in their early teens. Adolescent girls are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes than are adolescent boys.
Birth weight and gestational diabetes. Low birth weight and being born to a mother who had gestational diabetes during the pregnancy are both associated with a higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes.
Pre-term birth. Babies born prematurely — before 39 to 42 weeks' gestation —have a greater risk of type 2 diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes can affect nearly every major organ in your child's body, including the blood vessels, nerves, eyes and kidneys. The long-term complications of type 2 diabetes develop gradually over many years. Eventually, diabetes complications may be disabling or even life-threatening.
Complications of type 2 diabetes include: High blood pressure, High cholesterol, Heart and blood vessel disease, Stroke, Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, Kidney disease, Blindness, Amputation.
Keeping your child's blood sugar level close to normal most of the time can dramatically reduce the risk of these complications.
Signs and symptoms of type 2 diabetes often develop slowly. In fact, you can have type 2 diabetes for years and not know it. Look for: Increased thirst, Frequent urination, Increased hunger, Unintended weight loss, Fatigue, Blurred vision, Slow-healing sores, Frequent infections, Areas of darkened skin, usually in the armpits and neck.
See your doctor if you notice type 2 diabetes symptoms.
Type 2 diabetes develops when the body becomes resistant to insulin or when the pancreas is unable to produce enough insulin. Exactly why this happens is unknown, although genetics and environmental factors, such as being overweight and inactive, seem to be contributing factors.
Insulin is a hormone that comes from the gland situated behind and below the stomach (pancreas).
The pancreas secretes insulin into the bloodstream.
The insulin circulates, enabling sugar to enter your cells.
Insulin lowers the amount of sugar in your bloodstream.
As your blood sugar level drops, so does the secretion of insulin from your pancreas.
Glucose — a sugar — is a main source of energy for the cells that make up muscles and other tissues.
Glucose comes from two major sources: food and your liver.
Sugar is absorbed into the bloodstream, where it enters cells with the help of insulin.
Your liver stores and makes glucose.
When your glucose levels are low, such as when you haven't eaten in a while, the liver breaks down stored glycogen into glucose to keep your glucose level within a normal range.
In type 2 diabetes, this process doesn't work well. Instead of moving into your cells, sugar builds up in your bloodstream. As blood sugar levels increase, the insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas release more insulin, but eventually these cells become impaired and can't make enough insulin to meet the body's demands.
In the much less common type 1 diabetes, the immune system mistakenly destroys the beta cells, leaving the body with little to no insulin.
Factors that may increase your risk of type 2 diabetes include:
Weight. Being overweight is a main risk factor for type 2 diabetes. However, you don't have to be overweight to develop type 2 diabetes.
Fat distribution. If you store fat mainly in the abdomen, you have a greater risk of type 2 diabetes than if you store fat elsewhere, such as in your hips and thighs. Your risk of type 2 diabetes rises if you're a man with a waist circumference above 40 inches (101.6 centimeters) or a woman with a waist that's greater than 35 inches (88.9 centimeters).
Inactivity. The less active you are, the greater your risk of type 2 diabetes. Physical activity helps you control your weight, uses up glucose as energy and makes your cells more sensitive to insulin.
Family history. The risk of type 2 diabetes increases if your parent or sibling has type 2 diabetes.
Race or ethnicity. Although it's unclear why, certain people — including Black, Hispanic, American Indian and Asian American people — are at higher risk.
Age. The risk of type 2 diabetes increases as you get older, especially after age 45. That's probably because people tend to exercise less, lose muscle mass and gain weight as they age. But type 2 diabetes is also increasing dramatically among children, adolescents and younger adults.
Prediabetes. Prediabetes is a condition in which your blood sugar level is higher than normal, but not high enough to be classified as diabetes. Left untreated, prediabetes often progresses to type 2 diabetes.
Gestational diabetes. If you developed gestational diabetes when you were pregnant, your risk of developing type 2 diabetes increases. If you gave birth to a baby weighing more than 9 pounds (4 kilograms), you're also at risk of type 2 diabetes.
Polycystic ovarian syndrome. For women, having polycystic ovarian syndrome — a common condition characterized by irregular menstrual periods, excess hair growth and obesity — increases the risk of diabetes.
Areas of darkened skin, usually in the armpits and neck. This condition often indicates insulin resistance.
Type 2 diabetes can be easy to ignore, especially in the early stages when you're feeling fine. But diabetes affects many major organs, including your heart, blood vessels, nerves, eyes and kidneys. Controlling your blood sugar levels can help prevent these complications.
Although long-term complications of diabetes develop gradually, they can eventually be disabling or even life-threatening. Some of the potential complications of diabetes include:
Heart and blood vessel disease. Diabetes dramatically increases the risk of heart disease, stroke, high blood pressure and narrowing of blood vessels (atherosclerosis).
Nerve damage (neuropathy). Excess sugar can cause tingling, numbness, burning or pain that usually begins at the tips of the toes or fingers and gradually spreads upward. Eventually, you may lose all sense of feeling in the affected limbs.
Damage to the nerves that control digestion can cause problems with nausea, vomiting, diarrhea or constipation. For men, erectile dysfunction may be an issue.
Kidney damage. Diabetes can sometimes lead to kidney failure or irreversible end-stage kidney disease, which may require dialysis or a kidney transplant.
Eye damage. Diabetes increases the risk of serious eye diseases, such as cataracts and glaucoma, and may damage the blood vessels of the retina, potentially leading to blindness.
Slow healing. Left untreated, cuts and blisters can become serious infections, which may heal poorly. Severe damage might require toe, foot or leg amputation.
Hearing impairment. Hearing problems are more common in people with diabetes.
Skin conditions. Diabetes may leave you more susceptible to skin problems, including bacterial and fungal infections.
Sleep apnea. Obstructive sleep apnea is common in people with type 2 diabetes. Obesity may be the main contributing factor to both conditions. Treating sleep apnea may lower your blood pressure and make you feel more rested, but it's not clear whether it helps improve blood sugar control.
Alzheimer's disease. Type 2 diabetes seems to increase the risk of Alzheimer's disease, though it's not clear why. The worse your blood sugar control, the greater the risk appears to be.
Signs and symptoms are likely to develop gradually — often appearing one to three weeks after exposure to the disease.
Once signs and symptoms do appear, you're likely to experience: Fever that starts low and increases daily, possibly reaching as high as 104.9 F (40.5 C), Headache, Weakness and fatigue, Muscle aches, Sweating, Dry cough, Loss of appetite and weight loss, Abdominal pain, Diarrhea or constipation, Rash, Extremely swollen abdomen.
If you don't receive treatment, you may: Become delirious, Lie motionless and exhausted with your eyes half-closed in what's known as the typhoid state.
In addition, life-threatening complications often develop at this time.
In some people, signs and symptoms may return up to two weeks after the fever has subsided.
See a doctor immediately if you suspect you have typhoid fever. If you are from the United States and become ill while traveling in a foreign country, call the U.S. Consulate for a list of doctors. Better yet, find out in advance about medical care in the areas you'll visit, and carry a list of the names, addresses and phone numbers of recommended doctors.
If you develop signs and symptoms after you return home, consider consulting a doctor who focuses on international travel medicine or infectious diseases. A specialist may be able to recognize and treat your illness more quickly than can a doctor who isn't familiar with these areas.
Typhoid fever is caused by virulent bacteria called Salmonella typhi. Although they're related, Salmonella typhi and the bacteria responsible for salmonellosis, another serious intestinal infection, aren't the same.
The bacteria that cause typhoid fever spread through contaminated food or water and occasionally through direct contact with someone who is infected. In developing nations, where typhoid fever is established (endemic), most cases result from contaminated drinking water and poor sanitation. The majority of people in industrialized countries pick up typhoid bacteria while traveling and spread it to others through the fecal-oral route.
This means that Salmonella typhi is passed in the feces and sometimes in the urine of infected people. You can contract the infection if you eat food handled by someone with typhoid fever who hasn't washed carefully after using the toilet. You can also become infected by drinking water contaminated with the bacteria.
Even after treatment with antibiotics, a small number of people who recover from typhoid fever continue to harbor the bacteria in their intestinal tracts or gallbladders, often for years. These people, called chronic carriers, shed the bacteria in their feces and are capable of infecting others, although they no longer have signs or symptoms of the disease themselves.
Typhoid fever remains a serious worldwide threat — especially in the developing world — affecting an estimated 26 million or more people each year. The disease is established (endemic) in India, Southeast Asia, Africa, South America and many other areas.
Worldwide, children are at greatest risk of getting the disease, although they generally have milder symptoms than adults do.
If you live in a country where typhoid fever is rare, you're at increased risk if you: Work in or travel to areas where typhoid fever is established (endemic), Work as a clinical microbiologist handling Salmonella typhi bacteria, Have close contact with someone who is infected or has recently been infected with typhoid fever, Drink water contaminated by sewage that contains Salmonella typhi.
The most serious complications of typhoid fever — intestinal bleeding or holes (perforations) in the intestine — may develop in the third week of illness. A perforated intestine occurs when your small intestine or large bowel develops a hole, causing intestinal contents to leak into your abdominal cavity and triggering signs and symptoms such as severe abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and bloodstream infection (sepsis). This life-threatening complication requires immediate medical care.
Other possible complications include: Inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis), Inflammation of the lining of the heart and valves (endocarditis), Pneumonia, Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), Kidney or bladder infections, Infection and inflammation of the membranes and fluid surrounding your brain and spinal cord (meningitis), Psychiatric problems, such as delirium, hallucinations and paranoid psychosis.
With prompt treatment, nearly all people in industrialized nations recover from typhoid fever. Without treatment, some people may not survive complications of the disease.
Ulcerative colitis symptoms can vary, depending on the severity of inflammation and where it occurs. Signs and symptoms may include: Diarrhea, often with blood or pus, Abdominal pain and cramping, Rectal pain, Rectal bleeding — passing small amount of blood with stool, Urgency to defecate, Inability to defecate despite urgency, Weight loss, Fatigue, Fever, In children, failure to grow.
Most people with ulcerative colitis have mild to moderate symptoms. The course of ulcerative colitis may vary, with some people having long periods of remission.
Doctors often classify ulcerative colitis according to its location. Types of ulcerative colitis include:
Ulcerative proctitis. Inflammation is confined to the area closest to the anus (rectum), and rectal bleeding may be the only sign of the disease.
Proctosigmoiditis. Inflammation involves the rectum and sigmoid colon — the lower end of the colon. Signs and symptoms include bloody diarrhea, abdominal cramps and pain, and an inability to move the bowels in spite of the urge to do so (tenesmus).
Left-sided colitis. Inflammation extends from the rectum up through the sigmoid and descending colon. Signs and symptoms include bloody diarrhea, abdominal cramping and pain on the left side, and urgency to defecate.
Pancolitis. This type often affects the entire colon and causes bouts of bloody diarrhea that may be severe, abdominal cramps and pain, fatigue, and significant weight loss.
See your doctor if you experience a persistent change in your bowel habits or if you have signs and symptoms such as: Abdominal pain, Blood in your stool, Ongoing diarrhea that doesn't respond to over-the-counter medications, Diarrhea that awakens you from sleep, An unexplained fever lasting more than a day or two.
Although ulcerative colitis usually isn't fatal, it's a serious disease that, in some cases, may cause life-threatening complications.
The exact cause of ulcerative colitis remains unknown. Previously, diet and stress were suspected, but now doctors know that these factors may aggravate but don't cause ulcerative colitis.
One possible cause is an immune system malfunction. When your immune system tries to fight off an invading virus or bacterium, an abnormal immune response causes the immune system to attack the cells in the digestive tract, too.
Heredity also seems to play a role in that ulcerative colitis is more common in people who have family members with the disease. However, most people with ulcerative colitis don't have this family history.
Ulcerative colitis affects about the same number of women and men. Risk factors may include:
Age. Ulcerative colitis usually begins before the age of 30. But, it can occur at any age, and some people may not develop the disease until after age 60.
Race or ethnicity. Although whites have the highest risk of the disease, it can occur in any race. If you're of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, your risk is even higher.
Family history. You're at higher risk if you have a close relative, such as a parent, sibling or child, with the disease.
Possible complications of ulcerative colitis include: Severe bleeding, A hole in the colon (perforated colon), Severe dehydration, Bone loss (osteoporosis), Inflammation of your skin, joints and eyes, An increased risk of colon cancer, A rapidly swelling colon (toxic megacolon), Increased risk of blood clots in veins and arteries.
A common cause of ulnar wrist pain is a fall onto an outstretched hand. This can break bones in the wrist. Sports like tennis, golf, and football can sometimes bend the wrist back too far and this can damage tendons and ligaments. Carpenters and plumbers may develop ulnar wrist pain because they often must use tools in small spaces that require awkward positioning of the wrist.
An umbilical hernia creates a soft swelling or bulge near the navel. In babies who have an umbilical hernia, the bulge may be visible only when they cry, cough or strain.
Umbilical hernias in children are usually painless. Umbilical hernias that appear during adulthood may cause abdominal discomfort.
If you suspect that your baby has an umbilical hernia, talk with the baby's doctor. Seek emergency care if your baby has an umbilical hernia and: Appears to be in pain, Begins to vomit, Has tenderness, swelling or discoloration at the site of the hernia.
Similar guidelines apply to adults. Talk with your doctor if you have a bulge near your navel. Seek emergency care if the bulge becomes painful or tender. Prompt diagnosis and treatment can help prevent complications.
During gestation, the umbilical cord passes through a small opening in the baby's abdominal muscles. The opening normally closes just after birth. If the muscles don't join together completely in the midline of the abdominal wall, an umbilical hernia may appear at birth or later in life.
In adults, too much abdominal pressure contributes to umbilical hernias. Causes of increased pressure in the abdomen include: Obesity, Multiple pregnancies, Fluid in the abdominal cavity, Previous abdominal surgery, Long-term peritoneal dialysis to treat kidney failure.
Umbilical hernias are most common in infants — especially premature babies and those with low birth weights. In the United States, black infants appear to have a slightly increased risk of umbilical hernias. The condition affects boys and girls equally.
For adults, being overweight or having multiple pregnancies may increase the risk of developing an umbilical hernia. This type of hernia tends to be more common in women.
For children, complications of an umbilical hernia are rare. Complications can occur when the protruding abdominal tissue becomes trapped (incarcerated) and can no longer be pushed back into the abdominal cavity. This reduces the blood supply to the section of trapped intestine and can lead to abdominal pain and tissue damage.
If the trapped portion of intestine is completely cut off from the blood supply, it can lead to tissue death. Infection may spread throughout the abdominal cavity, causing a life-threatening situation.
Adults with umbilical hernias are somewhat more likely to experience a blockage of the intestines. Emergency surgery is typically required to treat these complications.
Not seeing or feeling a testicle where you would expect it to be in the scrotum is the main sign of an undescended testicle.
Testicles form in the abdomen during fetal development. During the last couple of months of normal fetal development, the testicles gradually descend from the abdomen through a tube-like passageway in the groin (inguinal canal) into the scrotum. With an undescended testicle, that process stops or is delayed.
An undescended testicle is typically detected when your baby is examined shortly after birth. If your son has an undescended testicle, ask the doctor how often your son will need to be examined. If the testicle hasn't moved into the scrotum by the time your son is 4 months old, the problem probably won't correct itself.
Treating an undescended testicle when your son is still a baby might lower the risk of complications later in life, such as infertility and testicular cancer.
Older boys — from infants to pre-adolescent boys — who have normally descended testicles at birth might appear to be "missing" a testicle later. This condition might indicate:
A retractile testicle, which moves back and forth between the scrotum and the groin and might be easily guided by hand into the scrotum during a physical exam. This is not abnormal and is due to a muscle reflex in the scrotum.
An ascending testicle, or acquired undescended testicle, that has "returned" to the groin and can't be easily guided by hand into the scrotum.
If you notice any changes in your son's genitals or are concerned about his development, talk to your son's doctor.
The exact cause of an undescended testicle isn't known. A combination of genetics, maternal health and other environmental factors might disrupt the hormones, physical changes and nerve activity that influence the development of the testicles.
Factors that might increase the risk of an undescended testicle in a newborn include: Low birth weight, Premature birth, Family history of undescended testicles or other problems of genital development, Conditions of the fetus that can restrict growth, such as Down syndrome or an abdominal wall defect, Alcohol use by the mother during pregnancy, Cigarette smoking by the mother or exposure to secondhand smoke, Parents' exposure to some pesticides.
In order for testicles to develop and function normally, they need to be slightly cooler than normal body temperature. The scrotum provides this cooler environment. Complications of a testicle not being located where it is supposed to be include:
Testicular cancer. Testicular cancer usually begins in the cells in the testicle that produce immature sperm. What causes these cells to develop into cancer is unknown. Men who've had an undescended testicle have an increased risk of testicular cancer.
The risk is greater for undescended testicles located in the abdomen than in the groin, and when both testicles are affected. Surgically correcting an undescended testicle might decrease, but not eliminate, the risk of future testicular cancer.
Fertility problems. Low sperm counts, poor sperm quality and decreased fertility are more likely to occur among men who've had an undescended testicle. This can be due to abnormal development of the testicle, and might get worse if the condition goes untreated for an extended period of time.
Other complications related to the abnormal location of the undescended testicle include:
Testicular torsion. Testicular torsion is the twisting of the spermatic cord, which contains blood vessels, nerves and the tube that carries semen from the testicle to the penis. This painful condition cuts off blood to the testicle.
If not treated promptly, this might result in the loss of the testicle. Testicular torsion occurs 10 times more often in undescended testicles than in normal testicles.
Trauma. If a testicle is located in the groin, it might be damaged from pressure against the pubic bone.
Inguinal hernia. If the opening between the abdomen and the inguinal canal is too loose, a portion of the intestines can push into the groin.
Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma symptoms depend on where the cancer occurs. It most often happens in the arms and legs, but it can happen anywhere in the body.
Signs and symptoms may include: Growing lump or area of swelling, If it grows very large, there may be pain, tingling and numbness, If it occurs in an arm or leg, there may be swelling in the hand or foot of an affected limb, If it occurs in the abdomen, there may be pain, loss of appetite and constipation, Fever, Weight loss.
Make an appointment with a doctor if you develop any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma.
Doctors know this cancer begins when a cell develops changes in its DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The changes tell the cell to multiply rapidly, creating a mass of abnormal cells (tumor). The cells can invade and destroy nearby healthy tissue. In time, the cancer cells can break away and spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body, such as the lungs and bones.
Factors that may increase the risk of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma include:
Older age. This cancer tends to occur in adults older than 50, though it can occur at any age.
Previous radiation therapy. Rarely, this cancer can develop in an area of the body that was previously treated with radiation therapy.
Most people who develop undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma have no known risk factors, and many people who have risk factors never develop the cancer.
Signs and symptoms of ureteral cancer include: Blood in urine, Back pain, Pain when urinating, Losing weight without trying, Fatigue.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes ureteral cancer.
Doctors know this cancer begins when a cell in the inside lining of the ureter develops an error (mutation) in its DNA. The mutation tells the cell to multiply rapidly and to continue living when normal cells would die. The result is a growing mass of abnormal cells that can grow to block the ureter or spread to other areas of the body.
Factors that can increase the risk of ureteral cancer include:
Increasing age. The risk of ureteral cancer increases with age. Most people diagnosed with this cancer are in their 70s and 80s.
Previous bladder or kidney cancer. People who have been diagnosed with bladder cancer or kidney cancer have an increased risk of ureteral cancer.
Smoking. Smoking tobacco increases the risk of ureteral cancer, as well as other urinary tract cancers, including kidney cancer and bladder cancer.
Ureteral obstruction might have no signs or symptoms. Signs and symptoms depend on where the obstruction occurs, whether it's partial or complete, how quickly it develops, and whether it affects one or both kidneys.
Signs and symptoms might include: Pain, Changes in the amount of urine produced, Difficulty urinating, Blood in the urine, Repeated urinary tract infections, High blood pressure (hypertension).
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have signs and symptoms that worry you.
Seek immediate medical attention if you experience: Pain so severe that you can't sit still or find a comfortable position, Pain accompanied by nausea and vomiting, Pain accompanied by fever and chills, Blood in your urine, Difficulty passing urine.
Different types of ureteral obstruction have different causes, some of them present at birth (congenital). They include:
Ureteral obstruction may be caused by:
Duplication of the ureter, the tube that carries urine from the kidney to the bladder. This common condition, which is present at birth (congential), causes two ureters to form on the same kidney. The second ureter can be normal or only partially developed. If either ureter doesn't function properly, urine can back up into the kidney and cause damage.
An abnormality where the ureter connects to the bladder or the kidney, which blocks urine flow. An abnormal connection between the ureter and kidney (ureteropelvic junction) may cause the kidney to swell and eventually stop working. This abnormality can be congenital or it can develop with normal childhood growth, result from an injury or scarring, or in rare cases, develop from a tumor. An abnormal connection between the ureter and bladder (ureterovesical junction) may cause urine to back up into the kidneys.
Ureterocele. If the ureter is too narrow and doesn't allow urine to flow normally, a tiny bulge in the ureter (ureterocele) may develop, usually in the section of the ureter closest to the bladder. This can block urine flow and cause urine to back up into the kidney, possibly leading to kidney damage.
Retroperitoneal fibrosis. This rare disorder occurs when fibrous tissue grows in the area behind the abdomen. The fibers may grow due to cancers or may result from taking certain medicines used to treat migraines. The fibers encircle and block the ureters, causing urine to back up into the kidneys.
Various causes inside (intrinsic) or outside (extrinsic) the ureter can lead to ureteral obstruction, including: Ureteral stones, Severe constipation, which happens primarily in children but also occurs in adults, Cancerous and noncancerous tumors, Internal tissue growth, such as endometriosis in females, Long-term swelling of the ureter wall, usually due to diseases such as tuberculosis or a parasite infection called schistosomiasis.
Ureteral obstruction can lead to urinary tract infections and kidney damage, which can be irreversible.
Signs and symptoms of urethral stricture include: Decreased urine stream, Incomplete bladder emptying, Spraying of the urine stream, Difficulty, straining or pain when urinating, Increased urge to urinate or more-frequent urination, Urinary tract infection.
Scar tissue, which can narrow the urethra, can be due to: A medical procedure that involves inserting an instrument, such as an endoscope, into the urethra, Intermittent or long-term use of a tube inserted through the urethra to drain the bladder (catheter), Trauma or injury to the urethra or pelvis, An enlarged prostate or previous surgery to remove or reduce an enlarged prostate gland, Cancer of the urethra or prostate, Sexually transmitted infections, Radiation therapy.
Urethral stricture is much more common in males than in females. Often the cause is unknown.
Many people experience occasional, minor leaks of urine. Others may lose small to moderate amounts of urine more frequently.
Types of urinary incontinence include:
Stress incontinence. Urine leaks when you exert pressure on your bladder by coughing, sneezing, laughing, exercising or lifting something heavy.
Urge incontinence. You have a sudden, intense urge to urinate followed by an involuntary loss of urine. You may need to urinate often, including throughout the night. Urge incontinence may be caused by a minor condition, such as infection, or a more-severe condition such as a neurologic disorder or diabetes.
Overflow incontinence. You experience frequent or constant dribbling of urine due to a bladder that doesn't empty completely.
Functional incontinence. A physical or mental impairment keeps you from making it to the toilet in time. For example, if you have severe arthritis, you may not be able to unbutton your pants quickly enough.
Mixed incontinence. You experience more than one type of urinary incontinence.
You may feel uncomfortable discussing incontinence with your doctor. But if incontinence is frequent or is affecting your quality of life, it's important to seek medical advice because urinary incontinence may: Indicate a more-serious underlying condition, Cause you to restrict your activities and limit your social interactions, Increase the risk of falls in older adults as they rush to the toilet.
Urinary incontinence isn't a disease, it's a symptom. It can be caused by everyday habits, underlying medical conditions or physical problems. A thorough evaluation by your doctor can help determine what's behind your incontinence.
Certain drinks, foods and medications may act as diuretics — stimulating your bladder and increasing your volume of urine. They include: Alcohol, Caffeine, Carbonated drinks and sparkling water, Artificial sweeteners, Chocolate, Chili peppers, Foods that are high in spice, sugar or acid, especially citrus fruits, Heart and blood pressure medications, sedatives, and muscle relaxants, Large doses of vitamin C.
Urinary incontinence may also be caused by an easily treatable medical condition, such as:
Urinary tract infection. Infections can irritate your bladder, causing you to have strong urges to urinate, and sometimes incontinence.
Constipation. The rectum is located near the bladder and shares many of the same nerves. Hard, compacted stool in your rectum causes these nerves to be overactive and increase urinary frequency.
Urinary incontinence can also be a persistent condition caused by underlying physical problems or changes, including:
Pregnancy. Hormonal changes and the increased weight of the fetus can lead to stress incontinence.
Childbirth. Vaginal delivery can weaken muscles needed for bladder control and also damage bladder nerves and supportive tissue, leading to a dropped (prolapsed) pelvic floor. With prolapse, the bladder, uterus, rectum or small intestine can get pushed down from the usual position and protrude into the vagina. Such protrusions can be associated with incontinence.
Changes with age. Aging of the bladder muscle can decrease the bladder's capacity to store urine. Also, involuntary bladder contractions become more frequent as you get older.
Menopause. After menopause women produce less estrogen, a hormone that helps keep the lining of the bladder and urethra healthy. Deterioration of these tissues can aggravate incontinence.
Hysterectomy. In women, the bladder and uterus are supported by many of the same muscles and ligaments. Any surgery that involves a woman's reproductive system, including removal of the uterus, may damage the supporting pelvic floor muscles, which can lead to incontinence.
Enlarged prostate. Especially in older men, incontinence often stems from enlargement of the prostate gland, a condition known as benign prostatic hyperplasia.
Prostate cancer. In men, stress incontinence or urge incontinence can be associated with untreated prostate cancer. But more often, incontinence is a side effect of treatments for prostate cancer.
Obstruction. A tumor anywhere along your urinary tract can block the normal flow of urine, leading to overflow incontinence. Urinary stones — hard, stone-like masses that form in the bladder — sometimes cause urine leakage.
Neurological disorders. Multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, a stroke, a brain tumor or a spinal injury can interfere with nerve signals involved in bladder control, causing urinary incontinence.
Factors that increase your risk of developing urinary incontinence include:
Gender. Women are more likely to have stress incontinence. Pregnancy, childbirth, menopause and normal female anatomy account for this difference. However, men with prostate gland problems are at increased risk of urge and overflow incontinence.
Age. As you get older, the muscles in your bladder and urethra lose some of their strength. Changes with age reduce how much your bladder can hold and increase the chances of involuntary urine release.
Being overweight. Extra weight increases pressure on your bladder and surrounding muscles, which weakens them and allows urine to leak out when you cough or sneeze.
Smoking. Tobacco use may increase your risk of urinary incontinence.
Family history. If a close family member has urinary incontinence, especially urge incontinence, your risk of developing the condition is higher.
Other diseases. Neurological disease or diabetes may increase your risk of incontinence.
Complications of chronic urinary incontinence include:
Skin problems. Rashes, skin infections and sores can develop from constantly wet skin.
Urinary tract infections. Incontinence increases your risk of repeated urinary tract infections.
Impacts on your personal life. Urinary incontinence can affect your social, work and personal relationships.
Urinary tract infections don't always cause signs and symptoms, but when they do they may include: A strong, persistent urge to urinate, A burning sensation when urinating, Passing frequent, small amounts of urine, Urine that appears cloudy, Urine that appears red, bright pink or cola-colored — a sign of blood in the urine, Strong-smelling urine, Pelvic pain, in women — especially in the center of the pelvis and around the area of the pubic bone.
UTIs may be overlooked or mistaken for other conditions in older adults.
Each type of UTI may result in more-specific signs and symptoms, depending on which part of your urinary tract is infected.
Contact your doctor if you have signs and symptoms of a UTI.
Urinary tract infections typically occur when bacteria enter the urinary tract through the urethra and begin to multiply in the bladder. Although the urinary system is designed to keep out such microscopic invaders, these defenses sometimes fail. When that happens, bacteria may take hold and grow into a full-blown infection in the urinary tract.
The most common UTIs occur mainly in women and affect the bladder and urethra.
Infection of the bladder (cystitis). This type of UTI is usually caused by Escherichia coli (E. coli), a type of bacteria commonly found in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. However, sometimes other bacteria are responsible.
Sexual intercourse may lead to cystitis, but you don't have to be sexually active to develop it. All women are at risk of cystitis because of their anatomy — specifically, the short distance from the urethra to the anus and the urethral opening to the bladder.
Infection of the urethra (urethritis). This type of UTI can occur when GI bacteria spread from the anus to the urethra. Also, because the female urethra is close to the vagina, sexually transmitted infections, such as herpes, gonorrhea, chlamydia and mycoplasma, can cause urethritis.
Urinary tract infections are common in women, and many women experience more than one infection during their lifetimes. Risk factors specific to women for UTIs include:
Female anatomy. A woman has a shorter urethra than a man does, which shortens the distance that bacteria must travel to reach the bladder.
Sexual activity. Sexually active women tend to have more UTIs than do women who aren't sexually active. Having a new sexual partner also increases your risk.
Certain types of birth control. Women who use diaphragms for birth control may be at higher risk, as well as women who use spermicidal agents.
Menopause. After menopause, a decline in circulating estrogen causes changes in the urinary tract that make you more vulnerable to infection.
Other risk factors for UTIs include:
Urinary tract abnormalities. Babies born with urinary tract abnormalities that don't allow urine to leave the body normally or cause urine to back up in the urethra have an increased risk of UTIs.
Blockages in the urinary tract. Kidney stones or an enlarged prostate can trap urine in the bladder and increase the risk of UTIs.
A suppressed immune system. Diabetes and other diseases that impair the immune system — the body's defense against germs — can increase the risk of UTIs.
Catheter use. People who can't urinate on their own and use a tube (catheter) to urinate have an increased risk of UTIs. This may include people who are hospitalized, people with neurological problems that make it difficult to control their ability to urinate and people who are paralyzed.
A recent urinary procedure. Urinary surgery or an exam of your urinary tract that involves medical instruments can both increase your risk of developing a urinary tract infection.
When treated promptly and properly, lower urinary tract infections rarely lead to complications. But left untreated, a urinary tract infection can have serious consequences.
Complications of a UTI may include:
Recurrent infections, especially in women who experience two or more UTIs in a six-month period or four or more within a year.
Permanent kidney damage from an acute or chronic kidney infection (pyelonephritis) due to an untreated UTI.
Increased risk in pregnant women of delivering low birth weight or premature infants.
Urethral narrowing (stricture) in men from recurrent urethritis, previously seen with gonococcal urethritis.
Sepsis, a potentially life-threatening complication of an infection, especially if the infection works its way up your urinary tract to your kidneys.
Normal urine color varies, depending on how much water you drink. Fluids dilute the yellow pigments in urine, so the more you drink, the clearer your urine looks. When you drink less, the color becomes more concentrated. Severe dehydration can produce urine the color of amber.
But urine can turn colors far beyond what's normal, including red, blue, green, dark brown and cloudy white.
Seek medical attention if you have:
Visible blood in your urine. Bloody urine is common in urinary tract infections and kidney stones. These problems usually cause pain. Painless bleeding might signal a more-serious problem, such as cancer.
Dark or orange urine. If your urine is dark or orange — particularly if you also have pale stools and yellow skin and eyes — your liver might be malfunctioning.
Discolored urine is often caused by medications, certain foods or food dyes. In some cases, though, changes in urine color can be caused by specific health problems.
The color categories here are approximate, because what looks like red to you might look like orange to someone else.
Despite its alarming appearance, red urine isn't necessarily serious. Red or pink urine can be caused by:
Blood. Factors that can cause urinary blood (hematuria) include urinary tract infections, an enlarged prostate, cancerous and noncancerous tumors, kidney cysts, long-distance running, and kidney or bladder stones.
Foods. Beets, blackberries and rhubarb can turn urine red or pink.
Medications. Rifampin (Rifadin, Rimactane), an antibiotic often used to treat tuberculosis, can turn urine reddish orange — as can phenazopyridine (Pyridium), a drug that numbs urinary tract discomfort, and laxatives containing senna.
Orange urine can result from:
Medications. Medications that can turn urine orange include the anti-inflammatory drug sulfasalazine (Azulfidine); phenazopyridine (Pyridium); some laxatives; and certain chemotherapy drugs.
Medical conditions. In some cases, orange urine can indicate a problem with your liver or bile duct, especially if you also have light-colored stools. Dehydration, which can concentrate your urine and make it much deeper in color, can also make your urine appear orange.
Blue or green urine can be caused by:
Dyes. Some brightly colored food dyes can cause green urine. Dyes used for some tests of kidney and bladder function can turn urine blue.
Medications. A number of medications produce blue or green urine, including amitriptyline, indomethacin (Indocin, Tivorbex) and propofol (Diprivan).
Medical conditions. Familial benign hypercalcemia, a rare inherited disorder, is sometimes called blue diaper syndrome because children with the disorder have blue urine. Green urine sometimes occurs during urinary tract infections caused by pseudomonas bacteria.
Brown urine can result from:
Food. Eating large amounts of fava beans, rhubarb or aloe can cause dark brown urine.
Medications. A number of drugs can darken urine, including the antimalarial drugs chloroquine and primaquine, the antibiotics metronidazole (Flagyl) and nitrofurantoin (Furadantin), laxatives containing cascara or senna, and methocarbamol — a muscle relaxant.
Medical conditions. Some liver and kidney disorders and some urinary tract infections can turn urine dark brown.
Extreme exercise. Muscle injury from extreme exercise can result in pink or cola-colored urine and kidney damage.
Urinary tract infections and kidney stones can cause urine to appear cloudy or murky.
Discolored urine that isn't the result of foods or medications could be caused by a medical condition that affects urine color. Factors that put you at risk of medical conditions that can affect urine color include:
Age. Tumors of the bladder and kidney, which can cause blood in the urine, are more common in older people. Men older than 50 occasionally have urinary blood due to an enlarged prostate gland.
Family history. A family history of kidney disease or kidney stones makes it more likely that you'll develop these problems. Both can cause blood in the urine.
Strenuous exercise. Distance runners are most at risk, but anyone who exercises vigorously can have urinary bleeding.
Many women who have fibroids don't have any symptoms. In those that do, symptoms can be influenced by the location, size and number of fibroids.
In women who have symptoms, the most common signs and symptoms of uterine fibroids include: Heavy menstrual bleeding, Menstrual periods lasting more than a week, Pelvic pressure or pain, Frequent urination, Difficulty emptying the bladder, Constipation, Backache or leg pains.
Rarely, a fibroid can cause acute pain when it outgrows its blood supply, and begins to die.
Fibroids are generally classified by their location. Intramural fibroids grow within the muscular uterine wall. Submucosal fibroids bulge into the uterine cavity. Subserosal fibroids project to the outside of the uterus.
See your doctor if you have: Pelvic pain that doesn't go away, Overly heavy, prolonged or painful periods, Spotting or bleeding between periods, Difficulty emptying your bladder, Unexplained low red blood cell count (anemia).
Seek prompt medical care if you have severe vaginal bleeding or sharp pelvic pain that comes on suddenly.
Doctors don't know the cause of uterine fibroids, but research and clinical experience point to these factors:
Genetic changes. Many fibroids contain changes in genes that differ from those in normal uterine muscle cells.
Hormones. Estrogen and progesterone, two hormones that stimulate development of the uterine lining during each menstrual cycle in preparation for pregnancy, appear to promote the growth of fibroids.
Fibroids contain more estrogen and progesterone receptors than normal uterine muscle cells do. Fibroids tend to shrink after menopause due to a decrease in hormone production.
Other growth factors. Substances that help the body maintain tissues, such as insulin-like growth factor, may affect fibroid growth.
Extracellular matrix (ECM). ECM is the material that makes cells stick together, like mortar between bricks. ECM is increased in fibroids and makes them fibrous. ECM also stores growth factors and causes biologic changes in the cells themselves.
Doctors believe that uterine fibroids develop from a stem cell in the smooth muscular tissue of the uterus (myometrium). A single cell divides repeatedly, eventually creating a firm, rubbery mass distinct from nearby tissue.
The growth patterns of uterine fibroids vary — they may grow slowly or rapidly, or they may remain the same size. Some fibroids go through growth spurts, and some may shrink on their own.
Many fibroids that have been present during pregnancy shrink or disappear after pregnancy, as the uterus goes back to a normal size.
There are few known risk factors for uterine fibroids, other than being a woman of reproductive age. Factors that can have an impact on fibroid development include:
Race. Although any woman of reproductive age can develop fibroids, black women are more likely to have fibroids than are women of other racial groups. In addition, black women have fibroids at younger ages, and they're also likely to have more or larger fibroids, along with more-severe symptoms.
Heredity. If your mother or sister had fibroids, you're at increased risk of developing them.
Other factors. Onset of menstruation at an early age; obesity; a vitamin D deficiency; having a diet higher in red meat and lower in green vegetables, fruit and dairy; and drinking alcohol, including beer, appear to increase your risk of developing fibroids.
Although uterine fibroids usually aren't dangerous, they can cause discomfort and may lead to complications such as a drop in red blood cells (anemia), which causes fatigue, from heavy blood loss. Rarely, a transfusion is needed due to blood loss.
Fibroids usually don't interfere with getting pregnant. However, it's possible that fibroids — especially submucosal fibroids — could cause infertility or pregnancy loss.
Fibroids may also raise the risk of certain pregnancy complications, such as placental abruption, fetal growth restriction and preterm delivery.
Signs and symptoms of uterine polyps include: Irregular menstrual bleeding — for example, having frequent, unpredictable periods of variable length and heaviness, Bleeding between menstrual periods, Excessively heavy menstrual periods, Vaginal bleeding after menopause, Infertility.
Some women have only light bleeding or spotting; others are symptom-free.
Seek medical care if you have: Vaginal bleeding after menopause, Bleeding between menstrual periods, Irregular menstrual bleeding.
Hormonal factors appear to play a role. Uterine polyps are estrogen-sensitive, meaning they grow in response to circulating estrogen.
Risk factors for developing uterine polyps include: Being perimenopausal or postmenopausal, Having high blood pressure (hypertension), Being obese, Taking tamoxifen, a drug therapy for breast cancer.
Uterine polyps might be associated with infertility. If you have uterine polyps and you're unable to have children, removal of the polyps might allow you to become pregnant, but the data are inconclusive.
Mild uterine prolapse generally doesn't cause signs or symptoms. Signs and symptoms of moderate to severe uterine prolapse include: Sensation of heaviness or pulling in your pelvis, Tissue protruding from your vagina, Urinary problems, such as urine leakage (incontinence) or urine retention, Trouble having a bowel movement, Feeling as if you're sitting on a small ball or as if something is falling out of your vagina, Sexual concerns, such as a sensation of looseness in the tone of your vaginal tissue.
Often, symptoms are less bothersome in the morning and worsen as the day goes on.
See your doctor to discuss your options if signs and symptoms of uterine prolapse become bothersome and disrupt your normal activities.
Uterine prolapse results from the weakening of pelvic muscles and supportive tissues. Causes of weakened pelvic muscles and tissues include: Pregnancy, Difficult labor and delivery or trauma during childbirth, Delivery of a large baby, Being overweight or obese, Lower estrogen level after menopause, Chronic constipation or straining with bowel movements, Chronic cough or bronchitis, Repeated heavy lifting.
Factors that can increase your risk of uterine prolapse include: One or more pregnancies and vaginal births, Giving birth to a large baby, Increasing age, Obesity, Prior pelvic surgery, Chronic constipation or frequent straining during bowel movements, Family history of weakness in connective tissue, Being Hispanic or white.
Uterine prolapse is often associated with prolapse of other pelvic organs. You might experience:
Anterior prolapse (cystocele). Weakness of connective tissue separating the bladder and vagina may cause the bladder to bulge into the vagina. Anterior prolapse is also called prolapsed bladder.
Posterior vaginal prolapse (rectocele). Weakness of connective tissue separating the rectum and vagina may cause the rectum to bulge into the vagina. You might have difficulty having bowel movements.
Severe uterine prolapse can displace part of the vaginal lining, causing it to protrude outside the body. Vaginal tissue that rubs against clothing can lead to vaginal sores (ulcers.) Rarely, the sores can become infected.
The signs, symptoms and characteristics of uveitis may include: Eye redness, Eye pain, Light sensitivity, Blurred vision, Dark, floating spots in your field of vision (floaters), Decreased vision.
Symptoms may occur suddenly and get worse quickly, though in some cases, they develop gradually. They may affect one or both eyes. Occasionally, there are no symptoms, and signs of uveitis are observed on a routine eye exam.
The uvea is the middle layer of tissue in the wall of the eye. It consists of the iris, the ciliary body and the choroid. When you look at your eye in the mirror, you will see the white part of the eye (sclera) and the colored part of the eye (iris).
The iris is located inside the front of the eye. The ciliary body is a structure behind the iris. The choroid is a layer of blood vessels between the retina and the sclera. The retina lines the inside of the back of the eye, like wallpaper. The inside of the back of the eye is filled with a gel-like liquid called vitreous.
The type of uveitis you have depends on which part or parts of the eye are inflamed:
Anterior uveitis affects the inside of the front of your eye (between the cornea and the iris) and the ciliary body. It is also called iritis and is the most common type of uveitis.
Intermediate uveitis affects the retina and blood vessels just behind the lens (pars plana) as well as the gel in the center of the eye (vitreous).
Posterior uveitis affects a layer on the inside of the back of your eye, either the retina or the choroid.
Panuveitis occurs when all layers of the uvea are inflamed, from the front to the back of your eye.
Contact your doctor if you think you have the warning signs of uveitis. He or she may refer you to an eye specialist (ophthalmologist). If you're having significant eye pain and unexpected vision problems, seek immediate medical attention.
In about half of all cases, the specific cause of uveitis isn't clear, and the disorder may be considered an autoimmune disease that only affects the eye or eyes. If a cause can be determined, it may be one of the following: An autoimmune or inflammatory disorder that affects other parts of the body, such as sarcoidosis, ankylosing spondylitis, systemic lupus erythematosus or Crohn's disease, An infection, such as cat-scratch disease, herpes zoster, syphilis, toxoplasmosis or tuberculosis, Medication side effect, Eye injury or surgery, Very rarely, a cancer that affects the eye, such as lymphoma.
People with changes in certain genes may be more likely to develop uveitis. Cigarette smoking has been associated with more difficult to control uveitis.
Left untreated, uveitis can cause complications, including: Retinal swelling (macular edema), Retina scarring, Glaucoma, Cataracts, Optic nerve damage, Retinal detachment, Permanent vision loss.
Signs and symptoms of vaginal agenesis often go unnoticed until girls reach their teens, but don't menstruate (amenorrhea). Some women have monthly cramping or abdominal pain.
If you haven't had a menstrual period by age 15, see your doctor.
It's not clear what causes vaginal agenesis. Scientists think that at some point during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy, tubes called the mullerian ducts don't develop properly. Normally, one of these ducts develops into the uterus and vagina, and the other grows into fallopian tubes.
Prior to treatment, vaginal agenesis may impact your sexual relationships.
After treatment, you should have a normal, satisfying sex life. However, if your uterus is also affected, you won't be able to become pregnant on your own.
Genitourinary syndrome of menopause (GSM) signs and symptoms may include: Vaginal dryness, Vaginal burning, Vaginal discharge, Genital itching, Burning with urination, Urgency with urination, Frequent urination, Recurrent urinary tract infections, Urinary incontinence, Light bleeding after intercourse, Discomfort with intercourse, Decreased vaginal lubrication during sexual activity, Shortening and tightening of the vaginal canal.
Many postmenopausal women experience GSM. But few seek treatment. Women may be embarrassed to discuss their symptoms with their doctor and may resign themselves to living with these symptoms.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any unexplained vaginal spotting or bleeding, unusual discharge, burning, or soreness.
Also make an appointment to see your doctor if you experience painful intercourse that's not resolved by using a vaginal moisturizer (K-Y Liquibeads, Replens, Sliquid, others) or water-based lubricant (Astroglide, K-Y Jelly, Sliquid, others).
Genitourinary syndrome of menopause is caused by a decrease in estrogen production. Less estrogen makes your vaginal tissues thinner, drier, less elastic and more fragile.
A drop in estrogen levels may occur: After menopause, During the years leading up to menopause (perimenopause), After surgical removal of both ovaries (surgical menopause), During breast-feeding, While taking medications that can affect estrogen levels, such as some birth control pills, After pelvic radiation therapy for cancer, After chemotherapy for cancer, As a side effect of breast cancer hormonal treatment.
GSM signs and symptoms may begin to bother you during the years leading up to menopause, or they may not become a problem until several years into menopause. Although the condition is common, not all menopausal women experience GSM. Regular sexual activity, with or without a partner, can help you maintain healthy vaginal tissues.
Certain factors may contribute to GSM, such as:
Smoking. Cigarette smoking affects your blood circulation, and may lessen the flow of blood and oxygen to the vagina and other nearby areas. Smoking also reduces the effects of naturally occurring estrogens in your body.
No vaginal births. Researchers have observed that women who have never given birth vaginally are more likely to develop GSM symptoms than women who have had vaginal deliveries.
No sexual activity. Sexual activity, with or without a partner, increases blood flow and makes your vaginal tissues more elastic.
Genitourinary syndrome of menopause increases your risk of:
Vaginal infections. Changes in the acid balance of your vagina make vaginal infections more likely.
Urinary problems. Urinary changes associated with GSM can contribute to urinary problems. You might experience increased frequency or urgency of urination or burning with urination. Some women experience more urinary tract infections or urine leakage (incontinence).
Early vaginal cancer may not cause any signs and symptoms. As it progresses, vaginal cancer may cause signs and symptoms such as: Unusual vaginal bleeding, for example, after intercourse or after menopause, Watery vaginal discharge, A lump or mass in your vagina, Painful urination, Frequent urination, Constipation, Pelvic pain.
See your doctor if you have any signs and symptoms related to vaginal cancer, such as abnormal vaginal bleeding. Since vaginal cancer doesn't always cause signs and symptoms, follow your doctor's recommendations about when you should have routine pelvic exams.
It's not clear what causes vaginal cancer. In general, cancer begins when healthy cells acquire a genetic mutation that turns normal cells into abnormal cells.
Healthy cells grow and multiply at a set rate, eventually dying at a set time. Cancer cells grow and multiply out of control, and they don't die. The accumulating abnormal cells form a mass (tumor).
Cancer cells invade nearby tissues and can break off from an initial tumor to spread elsewhere in the body (metastasize).
Vaginal cancer is divided into different types based on the type of cell where the cancer began. Vaginal cancer types include: Vaginal squamous cell carcinoma, which begins in the thin, flat cells (squamous cells) that line the surface of the vagina, and is the most common type, Vaginal adenocarcinoma, which begins in the glandular cells on the surface of your vagina, Vaginal melanoma, which develops in the pigment-producing cells (melanocytes) of your vagina, Vaginal sarcoma, which develops in the connective tissue cells or muscles cells in the walls of your vagina.
Factors that may increase your risk of vaginal cancer include:
Increasing age. Your risk of vaginal cancer increases as you age. Most people who are diagnosed with vaginal cancer are older than 60.
Atypical cells in the vagina called vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia. Being diagnosed with vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN) increases your risk of vaginal cancer.
With VAIN, cells in the vagina appear different from normal cells, but not different enough to be considered cancer. A small number of those with VAIN will eventually develop vaginal cancer, though doctors aren't sure what causes some cases to develop into cancer and others to remain benign.
VAIN is frequently caused by the sexually transmitted human papillomavirus (HPV), which can cause cervical, vaginal and vulvar cancers, among others. Vaccines that prevent some types of HPV infection are available.
Exposure to miscarriage prevention drug. If your mother took a drug called diethylstilbestrol (DES) while pregnant in the 1950s you may have an increased risk of a certain type of vaginal cancer called clear cell adenocarcinoma.
Other risk factors that have been linked to an increased risk of vaginal cancer include: Multiple sexual partners, Early age at first intercourse, Smoking, HIV infection.
Vaginal cancer may spread (metastasize) to distant areas of your body, such as your lungs, liver and bones.
Vaginitis signs and symptoms can include: Change in color, odor or amount of discharge from your vagina, Vaginal itching or irritation, Pain during intercourse, Painful urination, Light vaginal bleeding or spotting.
If you have vaginal discharge, which many women don't, the characteristics of the discharge might indicate the type of vaginitis you have. Examples include:
Bacterial vaginosis. You might develop a grayish-white, foul-smelling discharge. The odor, often described as a fishy odor, might be more obvious after sexual intercourse.
Yeast infection. The main symptom is itching, but you might have a white, thick discharge that resembles cottage cheese.
Trichomoniasis. An infection called trichomoniasis (trik-o-moe-NIE-uh-sis) can cause a greenish-yellow, sometimes frothy discharge.
See your doctor if you develop unusual vaginal discomfort, especially if:
You have a particularly unpleasant vaginal odor, discharge or itching.
You've never had a vaginal infection. Seeing your doctor can establish the cause and help you learn to identify the signs and symptoms.
You've had vaginal infections before.
You've had multiple sex partners or a recent new partner. You could have a sexually transmitted infection. Some sexually transmitted infections have signs and symptoms similar to those of a yeast infection or bacterial vaginosis.
You've completed a course of over-the-counter anti-yeast medication and your symptoms persist.
You have a fever, chills or pelvic pain.
You probably don't need to see your doctor every time you have vaginal irritation and discharge, particularly if: You've previously had a diagnosis of vaginal yeast infection and your signs and symptoms are the same as before, You know the signs and symptoms of a yeast infection, and you're confident that's what you have.
The cause depends on what type of vaginitis you have:
Bacterial vaginosis. This most common cause of vaginitis results from a change of the normal bacteria found in your vagina, to overgrowth of one of several other organisms. Usually, bacteria normally found in the vagina (lactobacilli) are outnumbered by other bacteria (anaerobes) in your vagina. If anaerobic bacteria become too numerous, they upset the balance, causing bacterial vaginosis.
This type of vaginitis seems to be linked to sexual intercourse — especially if you have multiple sex partners or a new sex partner — but it also occurs in women who aren't sexually active.
Yeast infections. These occur when there's an overgrowth of a fungal organism — usually C. albicans — in your vagina. C. albicans also causes infections in other moist areas of your body, such as in your mouth (thrush), skin folds and nail beds. The fungus can also cause diaper rash.
Trichomoniasis. This common sexually transmitted infection is caused by a microscopic, one-celled parasite called Trichomonas vaginalis. This organism spreads during sexual intercourse with someone who has the infection.    
In men, the organism usually infects the urinary tract, but often it causes no symptoms. In women, trichomoniasis typically infects the vagina, and might cause symptoms. It also increases a women's risk of getting other sexually transmitted infections.
Noninfectious vaginitis. Vaginal sprays, douches, perfumed soaps, scented detergents and spermicidal products may cause an allergic reaction or irritate vulvar and vaginal tissues. Foreign objects, such as tissue paper or forgotten tampons, in the vagina can also irritate vaginal tissues.
Genitourinary syndrome of menopause (vaginal atrophy). Reduced estrogen levels after menopause or surgical removal of your ovaries can cause the vaginal lining to thin, sometimes resulting in vaginal irritation, burning and dryness.
Factors that increase your risk of developing vaginitis include: Hormonal changes, such as those associated with pregnancy, birth control pills or menopause, Sexual activity, Having a sexually transmitted infection, Medications, such as antibiotics and steroids, Use of spermicides for birth control, Uncontrolled diabetes, Use of hygiene products such as bubble bath, vaginal spray or vaginal deodorant, Douching, Wearing damp or tightfitting clothing, Using an intrauterine device (IUD) for birth control.
Women with trichomoniasis or bacterial vaginosis are at a greater risk of acquiring sexually transmitted infections because of the inflammation caused by these disorders. In pregnant women, symptomatic bacterial vaginosis and trichomoniasis have been associated with premature deliveries and low birth weight babies.
Valley fever is the initial form of coccidioidomycosis infection. This initial, acute illness can develop into a more serious disease, including chronic and disseminated coccidioidomycosis.
The initial, or acute, form of coccidioidomycosis is often mild, with few or no symptoms. Signs and symptoms occur one to three weeks after exposure. They tend to be similar to flu symptoms. Symptoms can range from minor to severe, including: Fever, Cough, Tiredness, Shortness of breath, Headache, Chills, Night sweats, Joint aches and muscle soreness, Red, spotty rash, mainly on lower legs but sometimes on the chest, arms and back.
If you don't become ill or have symptoms from valley fever, you may only find out you've been infected later. You may find out when you have a positive skin or blood test or when small areas of residual infection in the lungs (nodules) show up on a routine chest X-ray. The nodules typically don't cause problems, but they can look like cancer on X-rays.
If you develop symptoms, especially severe ones, the course of the disease is highly variable. It can take months to fully recover. Fatigue and joint aches can last even longer. The disease's severity depends on several factors, including your overall health and the number of fungus spores you inhale.
If the initial coccidioidomycosis infection doesn't completely resolve, it may progress to a chronic form of pneumonia. This complication is most common in people with weakened immune systems.
Signs and symptoms include: Low-grade fever, Weight loss, Cough, Chest pain, Blood-tinged sputum (matter discharged during coughing), Nodules in the lungs.
The most serious form of the disease, disseminated coccidioidomycosis, is uncommon. It occurs when the infection spreads (disseminates) beyond the lungs to other parts of the body. Most often these parts include the skin, bones, liver, brain, heart, and the membranes that protect the brain and spinal cord (meninges).
Signs and symptoms of disseminated disease depend on the body parts affected and may include: Nodules, ulcers and skin lesions that are more serious than the rash that sometimes occurs with other forms of the disease, Painful lesions in the skull, spine or other bones, Painful, swollen joints, especially in the knees or ankles, Meningitis — an infection of the membranes and fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord.
Seek medical care if you are over 60, have a weakened immune system, are pregnant, or are of Filipino or African heritage, and you develop the signs and symptoms of valley fever, especially if you: Live in or have recently traveled to an area where this disease is common, Have symptoms that aren't improving.
Be sure to tell your doctor if you've traveled to a place where valley fever is common and you have symptoms.
Valley fever is caused by a person inhaling spores of certain fungi. The fungi that cause valley fever — Coccidioides immitis or Coccidioides posadasii — live in the soil in parts of Arizona, Nevada, Utah, New Mexico, California, Texas and Washington. It's named after the San Joaquin Valley in California. The fungi can also often be found in northern Mexico and Central and South America.
Like many other fungi, coccidioides species have a complex life cycle. In the soil, they grow as a mold with long filaments that break off into airborne spores when the soil is disturbed. A person can then inhale the spores.
The spores are extremely small and can be carried far by the wind. Once inside the lungs, the spores reproduce, continuing the disease cycle.
Risk factors for valley fever include:
Environmental exposure. Anyone who inhales the spores that cause valley fever is at risk of infection. People who live in areas where the fungi are common—especially those who spend a lot of time outdoors — have a greater risk.
Also, people who have jobs that expose them to dust are most at risk — construction, road and agricultural workers, ranchers, archaeologists, and military personnel on field exercises.
Race. For reasons that aren't well understood, people of Filipino and African heritage are more susceptible to developing serious fungal infections.
Pregnancy. Pregnant women are vulnerable to more-serious infections during the third trimester. New mothers are vulnerable right after their babies are born.
Weakened immune system. Anyone with a weakened immune system is at increased risk of serious complications. This includes people living with AIDS or those being treated with steroids, chemotherapy and anti-rejection drugs after transplant surgery. People with certain autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis or Crohn's disease, who are being treated with anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) drugs also have an increased risk of infection.
Diabetes. People with diabetes may have a higher risk of severe lung infections.
Age. Older adults are more likely to develop valley fever. This may be because their immune systems are less robust or because they have other medical conditions that affect their overall health.
Some people, especially pregnant women, people with weakened immune systems — such as those living with HIV/AIDS — and those of Filipino or African heritage are at risk of developing a more severe form of coccidioidomycosis.
Complications of coccidioidomycosis may include:
Severe pneumonia. Most people recover from coccidioidomycosis-related pneumonia without complications. Others, mainly people of Filipino and African heritage, and those with weakened immune systems, may become seriously ill.
Ruptured lung nodules. A small percentage of people develop thin-walled nodules (cavities) in their lungs. Many of these eventually disappear without causing any problems, but some may rupture, causing chest pain and difficulty breathing. A ruptured lung nodule might require the placement of a tube into the space around the lungs to remove the air or surgery to repair the damage.
Disseminated disease. This is the most serious complication of coccidioidomycosis but it's uncommon. If the fungus spreads (disseminates) throughout the body, it can cause problems including skin ulcers, abscesses, bone lesions, severe joint pain, heart inflammation, urinary tract problems and meningitis — a potentially fatal infection of the membranes and fluid covering the brain and spinal cord.
A varicocele often produces no signs or symptoms. Rarely, it might cause pain. The pain may: Vary from sharp to dull discomfort, Increase with standing or physical exertion, especially over long periods, Worsen over the course of a day, Be relieved when you lie on your back, Impaired fertility.
With time, varicoceles might enlarge and become more noticeable. A varicocele has been described as looking like a "bag of worms." The condition might cause a swollen testicle, almost always on the left side.
Because a varicocele usually causes no symptoms, it often requires no treatment. Varicoceles might be discovered during a fertility evaluation or a routine physical exam.
However, if you experience pain or swelling in your scrotum, discover a mass on your scrotum, notice that your testicles are different sizes, or develop a varicocele in your youth, or you're having problems with fertility, contact your doctor. A number of conditions can cause a scrotal mass or testicular pain, some of which require immediate treatment.
Your spermatic cord carries blood to and from your testicles. It's not certain what causes varicoceles.
However, many experts believe a varicocele forms when the valves inside the veins in the cord prevent your blood from flowing properly. The resulting backup causes the veins to widen (dilate). This might cause damage to the testicle and result in worsened fertility.
Varicoceles often form during puberty. Varicoceles usually occur on the left side, most likely because of the position of the left testicular vein.
There don't appear to be any significant risk factors for developing a varicocele.
A varicocele might cause:
Shrinkage of the affected testicle (atrophy). The bulk of the testicle comprises sperm-producing tubules. When damaged, as from varicocele, the testicle shrinks and softens. It's not clear what causes the testicle to shrink, but the malfunctioning valves allow blood to pool in the veins, which can result in increased pressure in the veins and exposure to toxins in the blood that may cause testicular damage.
Infertility. Varicoceles might keep the local temperature in or around the testicle too high, affecting sperm formation, movement (motility) and function.
Varicose veins may not cause any pain. Signs you may have varicose veins include: Veins that are dark purple or blue in color, Veins that appear twisted and bulging; they are often like cords on your legs.
When painful signs and symptoms occur, they may include: An achy or heavy feeling in your legs, Burning, throbbing, muscle cramping and swelling in your lower legs, Worsened pain after sitting or standing for a long time, Itching around one or more of your veins, Skin discoloration around a varicose vein.
Spider veins are similar to varicose veins, but they're smaller. Spider veins are found closer to the skin's surface and are often red or blue.
Spider veins occur on the legs, but can also be found on the face. They vary in size and often look like a spider's web.
Self-care — such as exercise, elevating your legs or wearing compression stockings — can help you ease the pain of varicose veins and may prevent them from getting worse. But if you're concerned about how your veins look and feel and self-care measures haven't stopped your condition from getting worse, see your doctor.
Weak or damaged valves can lead to varicose veins. Arteries carry blood from your heart to the rest of your tissues, and veins return blood from the rest of your body to your heart, so the blood can be recirculated. To return blood to your heart, the veins in your legs must work against gravity.
Muscle contractions in your lower legs act as pumps, and elastic vein walls help blood return to your heart. Tiny valves in your veins open as blood flows toward your heart then close to stop blood from flowing backward. If these valves are weak or damaged, blood can flow backward and pool in the vein, causing the veins to stretch or twist.
These factors increase your risk of developing varicose veins:
Age. The risk of varicose veins increases with age. Aging causes wear and tear on the valves in your veins that help regulate blood flow. Eventually, that wear causes the valves to allow some blood to flow back into your veins where it collects instead of flowing up to your heart.
Sex. Women are more likely to develop the condition. Hormonal changes during pregnancy, premenstruation or menopause may be a factor because female hormones tend to relax vein walls. Hormone treatments, such as birth control pills, may increase your risk of varicose veins.
Pregnancy. During pregnancy, the volume of blood in your body increases. This change supports the growing fetus, but also can produce an unfortunate side effect — enlarged veins in your legs. Hormonal changes during pregnancy may also play a role.
Family history. If other family members had varicose veins, there's a greater chance you will too.
Obesity. Being overweight puts added pressure on your veins.
Standing or sitting for long periods of time. Your blood doesn't flow as well if you're in the same position for long periods.
Complications of varicose veins, although rare, can include:
Ulcers. Painful ulcers may form on the skin near varicose veins, particularly near the ankles. A discolored spot on the skin usually begins before an ulcer forms. See your doctor immediately if you suspect you've developed an ulcer.
Blood clots. Occasionally, veins deep within the legs become enlarged. In such cases, the affected leg may become painful and swell. Any persistent leg pain or swelling warrants medical attention because it may indicate a blood clot — a condition known medically as thrombophlebitis.
Bleeding. Occasionally, veins very close to the skin may burst. This usually causes only minor bleeding. But any bleeding requires medical attention.
Vascular dementia symptoms vary, depending on the part of your brain where blood flow is impaired. Symptoms often overlap with those of other types of dementia, especially Alzheimer's disease dementia.
Vascular dementia signs and symptoms include: Confusion, Trouble paying attention and concentrating, Reduced ability to organize thoughts or actions, Decline in ability to analyze a situation, develop an effective plan and communicate that plan to others, Difficulty deciding what to do next, Problems with memory, Restlessness and agitation, Unsteady gait, Sudden or frequent urge to urinate or inability to control passing urine, Depression or apathy.
Vascular dementia symptoms may be most clear-cut when they occur suddenly following a stroke. When changes in your thinking and reasoning seem clearly linked to a stroke, this condition is sometimes called post-stroke dementia.
Sometimes a characteristic pattern of vascular dementia symptoms follows a series of strokes or ministrokes. Changes in your thought processes occur in noticeable steps downward from your previous level of function, unlike the gradual, steady decline that typically occurs in Alzheimer's disease dementia.
But vascular dementia can also develop very gradually, just like Alzheimer's disease dementia. What's more, vascular disease and Alzheimer's disease often occur together.
Studies show that many people with dementia and evidence of brain vascular disease also have Alzheimer's disease.
Vascular dementia results from conditions that damage your brain's blood vessels, reducing their ability to supply your brain with the amounts of nutrition and oxygen it needs to perform thought processes effectively.
Common conditions that may lead to vascular dementia include:
Stroke (infarction) blocking a brain artery. Strokes that block a brain artery usually cause a range of symptoms that may include vascular dementia. But some strokes don't cause any noticeable symptoms. These silent strokes still increase dementia risk.
With both silent and apparent strokes, the risk of vascular dementia increases with the number of strokes that occur over time. One type of vascular dementia involving many strokes is called multi-infarct dementia.
Narrowed or chronically damaged brain blood vessels. Conditions that narrow or inflict long-term damage on your brain blood vessels also can lead to vascular dementia. These conditions include the wear and tear associated with aging, high blood pressure, abnormal aging of blood vessels (atherosclerosis), diabetes, and brain hemorrhage.
In general, the risk factors for vascular dementia are the same as those for heart disease and stroke. Risk factors for vascular dementia include:
Increasing age. Your risk of vascular dementia rises as you grow older. The disorder is rare before age 65, and the risk rises substantially by your 90s.
History of heart attack, strokes or ministrokes. If you've had a heart attack, you may be at increased risk of having blood vessel problems in your brain. The brain damage that occurs with a stroke or a ministroke (transient ischemic attack) may increase your risk of developing dementia.
Abnormal aging of blood vessels (atherosclerosis). This condition occurs when deposits of cholesterol and other substances (plaques) build up in your arteries and narrow your blood vessels. Atherosclerosis can increase your risk of vascular dementia by reducing the flow of blood that nourishes your brain.
High cholesterol. Elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL), the "bad" cholesterol, are associated with an increased risk of vascular dementia.
High blood pressure. When your blood pressure's too high, it puts extra stress on blood vessels everywhere in your body, including your brain. This increases the risk of vascular problems in the brain.
Diabetes. High glucose levels damage blood vessels throughout your body. Damage in brain blood vessels can increase your risk of stroke and vascular dementia.
Smoking. Smoking directly damages your blood vessels, increasing your risk of atherosclerosis and other circulatory diseases, including vascular dementia.
Obesity. Being overweight is a well-known risk factor for vascular diseases in general, and therefore, presumably increases your risk of vascular dementia.
Atrial fibrillation. In this abnormal heart rhythm, the upper chambers of your heart begin to beat rapidly and irregularly, out of coordination with your heart's lower chambers. Atrial fibrillation increases your risk of stroke because it causes blood clots to form in the heart that can break off and go to the brain blood vessels.
The signs and symptoms of vasculitis vary greatly. They're often related to decreased blood flow throughout the body.
General signs and symptoms of vasculitis include: Fever, Headache, Fatigue, Weight loss, General aches and pains, Night sweats, Rash, Nerve problems, such as numbness or weakness.
Other signs and symptoms are related only to certain types of vasculitis. The symptoms can develop early and rapidly or in later stages of the disease.
Behcet's (beh-CHETS) disease. This condition causes inflammation of your arteries and veins. Signs and symptoms include mouth and genital ulcers, eye inflammation, and acne-like skin lesions.
Buerger's disease. This condition causes inflammation and clots in the blood vessels of your hands and feet, resulting in pain and ulcers in these areas. Rarely, Buerger's disease can affect blood vessels in the abdomen, brain and heart. It is also called thromboangiitis (throm-boe-an-jee-I-tis) obliterans.
Churg-Strauss syndrome (Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis). This condition is very rare. It mainly affects the lungs, skin, kidneys, heart and nerves in your limbs. Signs and symptoms vary greatly and include asthma, skin changes, nerve pain and nasal allergies.
Cryoglobulinemia. This condition results from abnormal proteins in the blood. Signs and symptoms include rash, joint pain, weakness, and numbness or tingling.
Giant cell arteritis. This condition is an inflammation of the arteries in your head, especially at the temples. Giant cell arteritis can cause headaches, scalp tenderness, jaw pain, blurred or double vision, and even blindness. It is also called temporal arteritis.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis. This condition causes inflammation of the blood vessels in your nose, sinuses, throat, lungs and kidneys. Signs and symptoms include nasal stuffiness, sinus infections, nosebleeds and possibly coughing up blood. But most people don't have noticeable symptoms until the damage is more advanced.
Henoch-Schonlein purpura (IgA vasculitis). This condition is more common in children than in adults, and causes inflammation of the smallest blood vessels (capillaries) of your skin, joints, bowel and kidneys. Signs and symptoms include abdominal pain, blood in the urine, joint pain, and a rash on your buttocks or lower legs.
Hypersensitivity vasculitis. Sometimes called allergic vasculitis, the primary sign of this condition is red spots on your skin, usually on your lower legs. It can be triggered by an infection or an adverse reaction to medicine.
Kawasaki disease. This condition most often affects children younger than age 5. Signs and symptoms include fever, rash and redness of the eyes. It is also called mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome.
Microscopic polyangiitis. This form of vasculitis affects small blood vessels, usually those in the kidneys, lungs or nerves. You may develop abdominal pain and a rash, fever, muscle pain and weight loss. If the lungs are affected, you may cough up blood.
Polyarteritis nodosa. This form of vasculitis usually affects the kidneys, the digestive tract, the nerves and the skin. Signs and symptoms include a rash, general malaise, weight loss, muscle and joint pain, abdominal pain after eating, high blood pressure, muscle pain and weakness, and kidney problems.
Takayasu's (tah-kah-YAH-sooz) arteritis. This form of vasculitis affects the larger arteries in the body, including the aorta. Signs and symptoms include joint pain, loss of pulse, high blood pressure, night sweats, fever, general malaise, appetite loss, headaches and visual changes.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you. Some types of vasculitis can worsen quickly, so early diagnosis is key to getting effective treatment.
The exact cause of vasculitis isn't fully understood. Some types are related to a person's genetic makeup. Others result from the immune system attacking blood vessel cells by mistake. Possible triggers for this immune system reaction include: Infections, such as hepatitis B and hepatitis C, Blood cancers, Immune system diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus and scleroderma, Reactions to certain drugs.
Blood vessels affected by vasculitis may bleed or become inflamed. Inflammation can cause the layers of the blood vessel wall to thicken. This narrows the blood vessels, reducing the amount of blood — and therefore oxygen and vital nutrients — that reaches your body's tissues and organs.
Vasculitis can occur in any sex or race or at any age. But some factors can increase the risk, such as: Smoking, Having chronic hepatitis B or C infections, Having some types of autoimmune conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma or lupus.
Vasculitis complications depend on the type and severity of your condition. Or they may be related to side effects of the prescription medications you use to treat the condition. Complications of vasculitis include:
Organ damage. Some types of vasculitis can be severe, causing damage to major organs.
Blood clots and aneurysms. A blood clot may form in a blood vessel, obstructing blood flow. Rarely, vasculitis will cause a blood vessel to weaken and bulge, forming an aneurysm (AN-yoo-riz-um).
Vision loss or blindness. This is a possible complication of untreated giant cell arteritis.
Infections. These include serious and life-threatening conditions, such as pneumonia and blood infection (sepsis).
Before you faint due to vasovagal syncope, you may experience some of the following: Pale skin, Lightheadedness, Tunnel vision — your field of vision narrows so that you see only what's in front of you, Nausea, Feeling warm, A cold, clammy sweat, Yawning, Blurred vision.
During a vasovagal syncope episode, bystanders may notice: Jerky, abnormal movements, A slow, weak pulse, Dilated pupils.
Recovery after a vasovagal episode generally begins in less than a minute. However, if you stand up too soon after fainting — within about 15 to 30 minutes — you're at risk of fainting again.
Fainting can be a sign of a more serious condition, such as a heart or brain disorder. You may want to consult your doctor after a fainting spell, especially if you never had one before.
Vasovagal syncope occurs when the part of your nervous system that regulates heart rate and blood pressure malfunctions in response to a trigger, such as the sight of blood.
Your heart rate slows, and the blood vessels in your legs widen (dilate.) This allows blood to pool in your legs, which lowers your blood pressure. Combined, the drop in blood pressure and slowed heart rate quickly reduce blood flow to your brain, and you faint.
Sometimes there is no classical vasovagal syncope trigger, but common triggers include: Standing for long periods of time, Heat exposure, Seeing blood, Having blood drawn, Fear of bodily injury, Straining, such as to have a bowel movement.
Loss of consciousness is the most common sign of ventricular fibrillation.
A condition in which the lower chambers of your heart beat too rapidly (ventricular tachycardia, or VT) can lead to ventricular fibrillation. Signs and symptoms of VT include: Chest pain, Rapid heartbeat (tachycardia), Dizziness, Nausea, Shortness of breath, Loss of consciousness.
If you or someone else is having the above signs and symptoms, seek emergency medical help immediately. Follow these steps:
Call 911 or the emergency number in your area.
If the person is unconscious, check for a pulse.
If no pulse, begin CPR to help maintain blood flow to the organs until an electrical shock (defibrillation) can be given. Push hard and fast on the person's chest — about 100 compressions a minute. It's not necessary to check the person's airway or deliver rescue breaths unless you've been trained in CPR.
Portable AEDs, which can deliver an electrical shock that may restart heartbeats, are available in an increasing number of places, such as in airplanes, police cars and shopping malls. They can even be purchased for your home.
Portable defibrillators come with built-in instructions for their use. They're programmed to deliver a shock only when it's needed.
To understand ventricular fibrillation, consider a normal heartbeat.
When your heart beats, the electrical impulses that cause it to contract follow a precise pathway through your heart. Interruption in these impulses can cause an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia).
Your heart is divided into four chambers. The chambers on each half of your heart form two adjoining pumps, with an upper chamber (atrium) and a lower chamber (ventricle).
During a heartbeat, the smaller, less muscular atria contract and fill the relaxed ventricles with blood. This contraction starts after the sinus node — a small group of cells in your right atrium — sends an electrical impulse causing your right and left atria to contract.
The impulse then travels to the center of your heart, to the atrioventricular node, which lies on the pathway between your atria and your ventricles. From here, the impulse exits the atrioventricular node and travels through your ventricles, causing them to contract and pump blood throughout your body.
The cause of ventricular fibrillation isn't always known. The most common cause is a problem in the electrical impulses traveling through your heart after a first heart attack or problems resulting from a scar in your heart's muscle tissue from a previous heart attack.
Some cases of ventricular fibrillation begin as a rapid heartbeat called ventricular tachycardia (VT). This rapid but regular beating of the heart is caused by abnormal electrical impulses that start in the ventricles.
Most VT occurs in people with a heart-related problem, such as scars or damage from a heart attack. Sometimes VT can last less than 30 seconds (nonsustained) and may not cause symptoms.  But VT may be a sign of more-serious heart problems.
If VT lasts more than 30 seconds, it will usually lead to palpitations, dizziness or fainting. Untreated VT will often lead to ventricular fibrillation.
Most cases of ventricular fibrillation are linked to some form of heart disease.
Factors that may increase your risk of ventricular fibrillation include: A previous episode of ventricular fibrillation, A previous heart attack, A heart defect you're born with (congenital heart disease), Heart muscle disease (cardiomyopathy), Injuries that cause damage to the heart muscle, such as electrocution, Use of illegal drugs, such as cocaine or methamphetamine, Significant electrolyte abnormalities, such as with potassium or magnesium.
Ventricular fibrillation is the most frequent cause of sudden cardiac death. The condition's rapid, erratic heartbeats cause the heart to abruptly stop pumping blood to the body. The longer the body is deprived of blood, the greater the risk of damage to your brain and other organs. Death can occur within minutes.
The condition must be treated immediately with defibrillation, which delivers an electrical shock to the heart and restores normal heart rhythm. The rate of long-term complications and death is directly related to the speed with which you receive defibrillation.
Signs and symptoms of serious heart defects often appear during the first few days, weeks or months of a child's life.
Ventricular septal defect (VSD) symptoms in a baby may include: Poor eating, failure to thrive, Fast breathing or breathlessness, Easy tiring.
You and your doctor may not notice signs of a ventricular septal defect at birth. If the defect is small, symptoms may not appear until later in childhood — if at all. Signs and symptoms vary depending on the size of the hole and other associated heart defects.
Your doctor may first suspect a heart defect during a regular checkup if he or she hears a murmur while listening to your baby's heart with a stethoscope. Sometimes VSDs can be detected by ultrasound before the baby is born.
Sometimes a VSD isn't detected until a person reaches adulthood. Symptoms and signs can include shortness of breath or a heart murmur your doctor hears when listening to your heart with a stethoscope.
Call your doctor if your baby or child: Tires easily when eating or playing, Is not gaining weight, Becomes breathless when eating or crying, Breathes rapidly or is short of breath.
Call your doctor if you develop: Shortness of breath when you exert yourself or when you lie down, Rapid or irregular heartbeat, Fatigue or weakness.
Congenital heart defects arise from problems early in the heart's development, but there's often no clear cause. Genetics and environmental factors may play a role. VSDs can occur alone or with other congenital heart defects.
During fetal development, a ventricular septal defect occurs when the muscular wall separating the heart into left and right sides (septum) fails to form fully between the lower chambers of the heart (ventricles).
Normally, the right side of the heart pumps blood to the lungs to get oxygen; the left side pumps the oxygen-rich blood to the rest of the body. A VSD allows oxygenated blood to mix with deoxygenated blood, causing the heart to work harder to provide enough oxygen to the body's tissues.
VSDs may be various sizes, and they can be present in several locations in the wall between the ventricles. There may be one or more VSD.
It's also possible to acquire a VSD later in life, usually after a heart attack or as a complication following certain heart procedures.
Ventricular septal defects may run in families and sometimes may occur with other genetic problems, such as Down syndrome. If you already have a child with a heart defect, a genetic counselor can discuss the risk of your next child having one.
A small ventricular septal defect may never cause any problems. Medium or large defects can cause a range of disabilities — from mild to life-threatening. Treatment can prevent many complications.
Heart failure. In a heart with a medium or large VSD, the heart needs to work harder to pump enough blood to the body. Because of this, heart failure can develop if medium to large VSDs aren't treated.
Pulmonary hypertension. Increased blood flow to the lungs due to the VSD causes high blood pressure in the lung arteries (pulmonary hypertension), which can permanently damage them. This complication can cause reversal of blood flow through the hole (Eisenmenger syndrome).
Endocarditis. This heart infection is an uncommon complication.
Other heart problems. These include abnormal heart rhythms and valve problems.
Brief episodes of ventricular tachycardia may not cause any symptoms in some people. Or you may have: Dizziness, Shortness of breath, Lightheadedness, Feeling as if your heart is racing (palpitations), Chest pain (angina).
Sustained and more-serious episodes of ventricular tachycardia may cause: Loss of consciousness or fainting, Cardiac arrest (sudden death).
Many different conditions can cause ventricular tachycardia. It's important to get a prompt, accurate diagnosis and appropriate care. See your doctor if you or your child has any problems with the heartbeat. In some cases, urgent care is needed.
Get emergency care, or call 911 or your local emergency number for anyone experiencing these symptoms: Chest pain that lasts more than a few minutes, Difficulty breathing, Fainting.
Ventricular tachycardia is caused by a disruption in the normal electrical impulses that control the rate of your heart's pumping action.
Many things can cause or contribute to problems with the heart's electrical system. These include: Abnormalities of the heart that result in scarring of heart tissue (sometimes called "structural heart disease"), the most common cause is a prior heart attack, Poor blood flow to the heart muscle due to coronary artery disease, Congenital heart conditions, including long QT syndrome, Imbalance of electrolytes necessary for conducting electrical impulses, Medication side effects, Use of drugs such as cocaine or methamphetamine.
In some cases, the exact cause of ventricular tachycardia can't be determined (idiopathic ventricular tachycardia).
To understand the causes of heart rate or rhythm problems such as tachycardia, it helps to understand how the heart's electrical system works.
Your heart is made up of four chambers — two upper chambers (atria) and two lower chambers (ventricles). Your heartbeat is normally controlled by a natural pacemaker called the sinus node, which is located in the right atrium. The sinus node produces electrical impulses that normally start each heartbeat.
From the sinus node, electrical impulses travel across the atria, causing the atrial muscles to contract and pump blood into the lower chambers of the heart (ventricles).
The electrical impulses then arrive at a cluster of cells called the atrioventricular (AV) node — usually the only pathway for signals to travel from the atria to the ventricles.
The AV node slows down the electrical signal before sending it to the ventricles. This slight delay allows the ventricles to fill with blood. When electrical impulses reach the muscles of the ventricles, they contract, causing them to pump blood either to the lungs or to the rest of the body.
When anything disrupts this complex system, it can cause the heart to beat too fast (tachycardia), too slow (bradycardia) or with an irregular rhythm.
Any condition that puts a strain on the heart or damages heart tissue can increase your risk of ventricular tachycardia. Lifestyle changes or medical treatment may decrease the risk associated with the following factors: Heart disease, Medication side effects, Severe electrolyte imbalances, Use of stimulant drugs such as cocaine or methamphetamine.
If you have a family history of ventricular tachycardia or other heart rhythm disorders, you may have an increased risk of ventricular tachycardia.
Complications of ventricular tachycardia vary in severity and depend on how fast your heart is beating, how long the rapid heartbeat lasts, how often tachycardia occurs and your overall heart health. Possible complications include: Frequent fainting spells or unconsciousness, Heart failure, Sudden death caused by cardiac arrest.
A dangerous condition related to ventricular tachycardia is ventricular fibrillation (V-fib). In V-fib, your lower heart chambers contract in a very rapid and uncoordinated manner.
This abnormal rhythm happens most often in people with heart disease or a prior heart attack. It may also occur due to electrolyte problems (such as high or low potassium levels) or, rarely, in otherwise normal hearts.
Ventricular fibrillation may also cause sudden cardiac arrest and lead to death if not treated immediately.
Vertebral tumors can cause different signs and symptoms, especially as tumors grow. The tumors may affect your spinal cord or the nerve roots, blood vessels, or bones of your spine. Vertebral tumor signs and symptoms may include: Pain at the site of the tumor due to tumor growth, Back pain, often radiating to other parts of your body, Back pain that's worse at night, Loss of sensation or muscle weakness, especially in your arms or legs, Difficulty walking, sometimes leading to falls, Feeling less sensitive to cold, heat and pain, Loss of bowel or bladder function, Paralysis, which may be mild or severe, and can strike in different areas throughout the body.
Spinal tumors progress at different rates depending on the type of tumor.
There are many causes of back pain, and most back pain isn't caused by a tumor. But because early diagnosis and treatment are important for vertebral tumors,  see your doctor about your back pain if: It's persistent and progressive, It's not activity related, It gets worse at night, You have a history of cancer and develop new back pain, You have other systemic signs and symptoms of cancer, such as nausea, vomiting or dizziness.
Seek immediate medical attention if you experience: Progressive muscle weakness or numbness in your legs or arms, Changes in bowel or bladder function.
Vertebral tumors that begin in the spine are very rare, and it's not clear why they develop. Experts suspect that defective genes play a role. But it's usually not known whether such genetic defects are inherited or simply develop over time. Or, they might be caused by something in the environment, such as exposure to certain chemicals.
Most vertebral tumors are metastatic, which means they have spread from tumors in organs elsewhere in the body. Any type of cancer can travel to the spine, but common tumor spread from the breast, lung and prostate are more likely than others to spread to the spine. Cancers of the bone, such as multiple myeloma, also may spread to the spine.
Vertebral tumors are also more common in people who have a prior history of cancer.
Both noncancerous and cancerous vertebral tumors can compress spinal nerves, leading to a loss of movement or sensation below the location of the tumor. This can sometimes cause changes in bowel and bladder function. Nerve damage may be permanent.
A vertebral tumor may also damage the bones of the spine and make it unstable, which raises the risk of a sudden fracture or collapse of the spine that could injure the spinal cord.
However, if caught early and treated aggressively, it may be possible to prevent further loss of function and regain nerve function. Depending on its location, a tumor that presses against the spinal cord itself may be life-threatening.
Although it's commonly called stomach flu, gastroenteritis isn't the same as influenza. Real flu (influenza) affects only your respiratory system — your nose, throat and lungs. Gastroenteritis, on the other hand, attacks your intestines, causing signs and symptoms, such as: Watery, usually nonbloody diarrhea — bloody diarrhea usually means you have a different, more severe infection, Abdominal cramps and pain, Nausea, vomiting or both, Occasional muscle aches or headache, Low-grade fever.
Depending on the cause, viral gastroenteritis symptoms may appear within one to three days after you're infected and can range from mild to severe. Symptoms usually last just a day or two, but occasionally they may persist as long as 10 days.
Because the symptoms are similar, it's easy to confuse viral diarrhea with diarrhea caused by bacteria, such as Clostridium difficile, salmonella and E. coli, or parasites, such as giardia.
If you're an adult, call your doctor if: You're not able to keep liquids down for 24 hours, You've been vomiting for more than two days, You're vomiting blood, You're dehydrated — signs of dehydration include excessive thirst, dry mouth, deep yellow urine or little or no urine, and severe weakness, dizziness or lightheadedness, You notice blood in your bowel movements, You have a fever above 104 F (40 C).
See your doctor right away if your child: Has a fever of 102 F (38.9 C) or higher, Seems lethargic or very irritable, Is in a lot of discomfort or pain, Has bloody diarrhea, Seems dehydrated — watch for signs of dehydration in sick infants and children by comparing how much they drink and urinate with how much is normal for them.
If you have an infant, remember that while spitting up may be an everyday occurrence for your baby, vomiting is not. Babies vomit for a variety of reasons, many of which may require medical attention.
Call your baby's doctor right away if your baby: Has vomiting that lasts more than several hours, Hasn't had a wet diaper in six hours, Has bloody stools or severe diarrhea, Has a sunken soft spot (fontanel)on the top of his or her head, Has a dry mouth or cries without tears, Is unusually sleepy, drowsy or unresponsive.
You're most likely to contract viral gastroenteritis when you eat or drink contaminated food or water, or if you share utensils, towels or food with someone who's infected.
A number of viruses can cause gastroenteritis, including:
Noroviruses. Both children and adults are affected by noroviruses, the most common cause of foodborne illness worldwide. Norovirus infection can sweep through families and communities. It's especially likely to spread among people in confined spaces. In most cases, you pick up the virus from contaminated food or water, although person-to-person transmission also is possible.
Rotavirus. Worldwide, this is the most common cause of viral gastroenteritis in children, who are usually infected when they put their fingers or other objects contaminated with the virus into their mouths. The infection is most severe in infants and young children. Adults infected with rotavirus may not have symptoms, but can still spread the illness — of particular concern in institutional settings because infected adults unknowingly can pass the virus to others. A vaccine against viral gastroenteritis is available in some countries, including the United States, and appears to be effective in preventing the infection.
Some shellfish, especially raw or undercooked oysters, also can make you sick. Although contaminated drinking water is a cause of viral diarrhea, in many cases the virus is passed through the fecal-oral route — that is, someone with a virus handles food you eat without washing his or her hands after using the toilet.
Gastroenteritis occurs all over the world, affecting people of every age, race and background.
People who may be more susceptible to gastroenteritis include:
Young children. Children in child care centers or elementary schools may be especially vulnerable because it takes time for a child's immune system to mature.
Older adults. Adult immune systems tend to become less efficient later in life. Older adults in nursing homes, in particular, are vulnerable because their immune systems weaken and they live in close contact with others who may pass along germs.
Schoolchildren, churchgoers or dormitory residents. Anywhere that groups of people come together in close quarters can be an environment for an intestinal infection to get passed.
Anyone with a weakened immune system. If your resistance to infection is low — for instance, if your immune system is compromised by HIV/AIDS, chemotherapy or another medical condition — you may be especially at risk.
Each gastrointestinal virus has a season when it's most active. If you live in the Northern Hemisphere, for instance, you're more likely to have rotavirus or norovirus infections between October and April.
The main complication of viral gastroenteritis is dehydration — a severe loss of water and essential salts and minerals. If you're healthy and drink enough to replace fluids you lose from vomiting and diarrhea, dehydration shouldn't be a problem.
Infants, older adults and people with suppressed immune systems may become severely dehydrated when they lose more fluids than they can replace. Hospitalization might be needed so that lost fluids can be replaced intravenously. Dehydration can be fatal, but rarely.
Signs and symptoms of viral hemorrhagic fevers vary by disease. In general, initial signs and symptoms may include: High fever, Fatigue, Dizziness, Muscle, bone or joint aches, Weakness.
Severe cases of some types of viral hemorrhagic fevers may cause bleeding, but people rarely die of blood loss. Bleeding may occur: Under the skin, In internal organs, From the mouth, eyes or ears.
Other signs and symptoms of severe infections can include: Septic shock, Nervous system malfunctions, Coma, Delirium, Kidney failure, Respiratory failure, Liver failure.
The best time to see a doctor is before you travel to a developing country to ensure you've received any available vaccinations and pre-travel advice for staying healthy.
If you develop signs and symptoms once you return home, consult a doctor, preferably one who focuses on international medicine or infectious diseases. A specialist may be able to recognize and treat your illness faster. Be sure to let your doctor know what areas you've visited.
The viruses that cause viral hemorrhagic fevers live naturally in a variety of animal and insect hosts — most commonly mosquitoes, ticks, rodents or bats.
Each of these hosts typically lives in a specific geographic area, so each particular disease usually occurs only where that virus's host normally lives. Some viral hemorrhagic fevers also can be transmitted from person to person, and can spread if an infected person travels from one area to another.
The route of transmission varies by specific virus. Some viral hemorrhagic fevers are spread by mosquito or tick bites. Others are transmitted by contact with infected blood or semen. A few varieties can be inhaled from infected rat feces or urine.
If you travel to an area where a particular hemorrhagic fever is common, you may become infected there and then develop symptoms after you return home. It can take up to 21 days for symptoms to develop.
Simply living in or traveling to an area where a particular viral hemorrhagic fever is common will increase your risk of becoming infected with that particular virus. Several other factors can increase your risk even more, including: Working with the sick, Slaughtering infected animals, Sharing needles to use intravenous drugs, Having unprotected sex, Working outdoors or in rat-infested buildings, Being exposed to infected blood or other body fluids.
Viral hemorrhagic fevers can damage your: Brain, Eyes, Heart, Kidneys, Liver, Lungs, Spleen.
In some cases, the damage is severe enough to cause death.
Signs and symptoms of vitamin deficiency anemia include: Fatigue, Shortness of breath, Dizziness, Pale or yellowish skin, Irregular heartbeats, Weight loss, Numbness or tingling in your hands and feet, Muscle weakness, Personality changes, Unsteady movements, Mental confusion or forgetfulness.
Vitamin deficiency usually develops slowly over several months to years. Vitamin deficiency signs and symptoms may be subtle at first, but they increase as the deficiency worsens.
Vitamin deficiency anemia develops when your body has a shortage of the vitamins needed to produce enough healthy red blood cells. Red blood cells carry oxygen from your lungs throughout your body.
If your diet is lacking in certain vitamins, vitamin deficiency anemia can develop. Or vitamin deficiency anemia may develop because your body can't properly absorb the nutrients from the foods you eat.
Causes of vitamin deficiency anemias include:
Folate, also known as vitamin B-9, is a nutrient found mainly in fruits and leafy green vegetables. A diet consistently lacking in these foods can lead to a deficiency.
Deficiency can also result if your body is unable to absorb folate from food. Most nutrients from food are absorbed in your small intestine. You might have difficulty absorbing folate or folic acid, the synthetic form of folate that's added to foods and supplements, if: You have a disease of the small intestine, such as celiac disease, You've had a large part of the small intestine surgically removed or bypassed, You drink excessive amounts of alcohol, You take certain prescription drugs, such as some anti-seizure medications.
Pregnant women and women who are breast-feeding have an increased demand for folate, as do people undergoing dialysis for kidney disease. Failure to meet this increased demand can result in a deficiency.
Vitamin B-12 deficiency can result from a diet lacking in vitamin B-12, which is found mainly in meat, eggs and milk.
However, the most common cause of vitamin B-12 deficiency anemia is a lack of a substance called intrinsic factor, which can be caused when your immune system mistakenly attacks the stomach cells that produce this substance. This type of anemia is called pernicious anemia.
Intrinsic factor is a protein secreted by the stomach that joins vitamin B-12 in the stomach and moves it through the small intestine to be absorbed by your bloodstream. Without intrinsic factor, vitamin B-12 can't be absorbed and leaves your body as waste.
People with endocrine-related autoimmune disorders, such as diabetes or thyroid disease, may have an increased risk of developing pernicious anemia.
Vitamin B-12 deficiency anemia can also occur if your small intestine can't absorb vitamin B-12 for reasons other than a lack of intrinsic factor. This may happen if: You've had surgery to your stomach or small intestine, such as gastric bypass surgery, You have abnormal bacterial growth in your small intestine, You have an intestinal disease, such as Crohn's disease or celiac disease, that interferes with absorption of the vitamin, You've ingested a tapeworm from eating contaminated fish. The tapeworm saps nutrients from your body..
Vitamin C deficiency can develop if you don't get enough vitamin C from the foods you eat. Vitamin C deficiency is also possible if something impairs your ability to absorb vitamin C from food. For instance, smoking impairs your body's ability to absorb vitamin C.
Certain chronic illnesses, such as cancer or chronic kidney disease, also increase your risk of vitamin C deficiency anemia by affecting the absorption of vitamin C.
A number of factors can affect your body's vitamin stores. In general, your risk of vitamin deficiency is increased if:
Your diet contains little to no natural vitamin food sources, such as meat, dairy, fruits and vegetables. Vegetarians who don't eat dairy products and vegans, who don't eat any foods from animals, may fall into this category.
Consistently overcooking your food also can cause vitamin deficiency.
You're pregnant, and you aren't taking a multivitamin. Folic acid supplements are especially important during pregnancy.
You have intestinal problems or other medical conditions that interfere with absorption of vitamins. Abnormal bacterial growth in your stomach or surgery to your intestines or stomach can interfere with the absorption of vitamin B-12.
You abuse alcohol. Alcohol interferes with the absorption of folate and vitamin C, as well as other vitamins.
You take certain prescription medications that can block absorption of vitamins. Anti-seizure drugs can block the absorption of folate. Antacids and some drugs used to treat type 2 diabetes may interfere with B-12 absorption.
Being deficient in vitamins increases your risk of many health problems, including:
Pregnant women with folate deficiency may be more likely to experience complications, such as premature birth. A developing fetus that doesn't get enough folate from its mother can develop birth defects of the brain and spinal cord.
If you're thinking of becoming pregnant, ask your doctor whether you should consider taking folic acid supplements so that your body's stores of folate will be enough to support your baby.
While vitamin B-12 is important for the production of red blood cells, it's also important for a healthy nervous system.
Untreated, vitamin B-12 deficiency can lead to neurological problems, such as persistent tingling in your hands and feet or problems with balance. It can lead to mental confusion and forgetfulness because vitamin B-12 is necessary for healthy brain function.
Without treatment for vitamin B-12 deficiency, neurological complications can become permanent. Vitamin B-12 deficiency can cause these and other health problems before it leads to anemia.
Vitamin C deficiency can lead to scurvy. Signs and symptoms of this rare disease include bleeding under the skin and around the gums.
Vitiligo signs include: Patchy loss of skin color, which usually first appears on the hands, face, and areas around body openings and the genitals, Premature whitening or graying of the hair on your scalp, eyelashes, eyebrows or beard, Loss of color in the tissues that line the inside of your mouth and nose (mucous membranes).
Vitiligo can start at any age, but usually appears before age 30.
Depending on the type of vitiligo you have, it may affect:
Nearly all skin surfaces. With this type, called universal vitiligo, the discoloration affects nearly all skin surfaces.
Many parts of your body. With this most common type, called generalized vitiligo, the discolored patches often progress similarly on corresponding body parts (symmetrically).
Only one side or part of your body. This type, called segmental vitiligo, tends to occur at a younger age, progress for a year or two, then stop.
One or only a few areas of your body. This type is called localized (focal) vitiligo.
The face and hands. With this type, called acrofacial vitiligo, the affected skin is on the face and hands, and around body openings, such as the eyes, nose and ears.
It's difficult to predict how your disease will progress. Sometimes the patches stop forming without treatment. In most cases, pigment loss spreads and eventually involves most of your skin. Occasionally, the skin gets its color back.
See your doctor if areas of your skin, hair or mucous membranes lose coloring. Vitiligo has no cure. But treatment might stop or slow the discoloring process and return some color to your skin.
Vitiligo occurs when pigment-producing cells (melanocytes) die or stop producing melanin — the pigment that gives your skin, hair and eyes color. The involved patches of skin become lighter or white. It's unclear exactly what causes these pigment cells to fail or die. It may be related to: A disorder of the immune system (autoimmune condition), Family history (heredity), A trigger event, such as stress, severe sunburn or skin trauma, such as contact with a chemical.
People with vitiligo may be at increased risk of: Social or psychological distress, Sunburn, Eye problems, Hearing loss.
Your vocal cords are two flexible bands of muscle tissue that sit at the entrance to the windpipe (trachea). When you speak, the bands come together and vibrate to make sound. The rest of the time, the vocal cords are relaxed in an open position, so you can breathe.
In most cases of vocal cord paralysis, only one vocal cord is paralyzed. Paralysis of both of your vocal cords is a rare but serious condition. This can cause vocal difficulties and significant problems with breathing and swallowing.
Signs and symptoms of vocal cord paralysis may include: A breathy quality to the voice, Hoarseness, Noisy breathing, Loss of vocal pitch, Choking or coughing while swallowing food, drink or saliva, The need to take frequent breaths while speaking, Inability to speak loudly, Loss of your gag reflex, Ineffective coughing, Frequent throat clearing.
If you have unexplained, persistent hoarseness for more than two weeks, or if you notice any unexplained voice changes or discomfort, contact your doctor.
In vocal cord paralysis, the nerve impulses to your voice box (larynx) are disrupted, resulting in paralysis of the muscle. Doctors often don't know the cause of vocal cord paralysis. Known causes may include:
Injury to the vocal cord during surgery. Surgery on or near your neck or upper chest can result in damage to the nerves that serve your voice box. Surgeries that carry a risk of damage include surgeries to the thyroid or parathyroid glands, esophagus, neck, and chest.
Neck or chest injury. Trauma to your neck or chest may injure the nerves that serve your vocal cords or the voice box itself.
Stroke. A stroke interrupts blood flow in your brain and may damage the part of your brain that sends messages to the voice box.
Tumors. Tumors, both cancerous and noncancerous, can grow in or around the muscles, cartilage or nerves controlling the function of your voice box and can cause vocal cord paralysis.
Infections. Some infections, such as Lyme disease, Epstein-Barr virus and herpes, can cause inflammation and directly damage the nerves in the larynx.
Neurological conditions. If you have certain neurological conditions, such as multiple sclerosis or Parkinson's disease, you may experience vocal cord paralysis.
Factors that may increase your risk of developing vocal cord paralysis include:
Undergoing throat or chest surgery. People who need surgery on their thyroid, throat or upper chest have an increased risk of vocal cord nerve damage. Sometimes breathing tubes used in surgery or to help you breathe if you're having serious respiratory trouble can damage the vocal cord nerves.
Having a neurological condition. People with certain neurological conditions — such as Parkinson's disease or multiple sclerosis — are more likely to develop vocal cord weakness or paralysis.
Breathing problems associated with vocal cord paralysis may be so mild that you just have a hoarse-sounding voice, or they can be so serious that they're life-threatening.
Because vocal cord paralysis keeps the opening to the airway from completely opening or closing, other complications may include choking on or actually inhaling (aspirating) food or liquid. Aspiration that leads to severe pneumonia is rare but serious and requires immediate medical care
Your voice box (larynx) is made of cartilage, muscle and mucous membranes located at the top of your windpipe (trachea) and the base of your tongue. Your vocal cords are two flexible bands of muscle tissue that sit at the entrance of the windpipe. Sound is created when your vocal cords vibrate.
This vibration comes from air moving through the larynx, bringing your vocal cords closer together. Your vocal cords also help close your voice box when you swallow, preventing you from inhaling food or liquid.
If your vocal cords become inflamed, develop growths or become paralyzed, they can't work properly, and you may develop a voice disorder.
Some common voice disorders include: Laryngitis, Muscle tension dysphonia, Neurological voice disorders, such as spasmodic dysphonia, Polyps, nodules or cysts on the vocal cords (noncancerous lesions), Precancerous and cancerous lesions, Vocal cord paralysis or weakness, White patches called leukoplakia.
Many risk factors can contribute to a voice disorder, including: Aging, Alcohol use, Allergies, Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), Illnesses, such as colds or upper respiratory infections, Improper throat clearing over a long time, Neurological disorders, Psychological stress, Scarring from neck surgery or from trauma to the front of the neck, Screaming, Smoking, Throat cancer, Throat dehydration, Thyroid problems, Voice misuse or overuse.
Many people with von Willebrand disease don't know it because the signs are mild or absent. The most common sign of the condition is abnormal bleeding.
There are three main types of the disease. The amount of bleeding varies from one person to another, depending on the type and severity of the disease.
If you have von Willebrand disease, you might have: Excessive bleeding from an injury or after surgery or dental work, Nosebleeds that don't stop within 10 minutes, Heavy or long menstrual bleeding, Blood in your urine or stool, Easy bruising or lumpy bruises.
Menstrual signs and symptoms may include: Blood clots greater than 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) in diameter in your menstrual flow, The need to change your menstrual pad or tampon more than once an hour, The need to use double sanitary protection for menstrual flow, Symptoms of anemia, including tiredness, fatigue or shortness of breath.
Contact your doctor if you have bleeding that lasts a long time or is hard to stop.
The usual cause of von Willebrand disease is an inherited abnormal gene that controls von Willebrand factor — a protein that plays a key role in blood clotting.
When you have low levels of this protein or it doesn't work as it should, small blood cells called platelets cannot stick together properly nor attach themselves normally to the blood vessel walls when an injury has occurred. This interferes with the clotting process and can sometimes cause uncontrolled bleeding.
Many people with von Willebrand disease also have low levels of factor VIII, another protein that helps in clotting.
Factor VIII is involved in another inherited clotting disorder called hemophilia. But unlike hemophilia, which mainly affects males, von Willebrand disease affects males and females and is usually milder.
Rarely, von Willebrand disease can develop later in life in people who didn't inherit an abnormal gene from a parent. This is known as acquired von Willebrand syndrome, and it's likely caused by an underlying medical condition.
The main risk factor for von Willebrand disease is having a family history of it. Parents pass the abnormal gene for the disease to their children. Rarely, the disease skips generations.
The disease is usually an "autosomal dominant inherited" disorder, which means you need an abnormal gene from only one parent to be affected. If you have the gene for von Willebrand disease, you have a 50% chance of transmitting this gene to your children.
The most severe form of the condition is "autosomal recessive," which means both of your parents have to pass an abnormal gene to you.
Rarely, von Willebrand disease can cause uncontrollable bleeding, which can be life-threatening. Other complications of von Willebrand disease can include:
Anemia. Women who have heavy menstrual bleeding can develop iron deficiency anemia.
Swelling and pain. This can be a result of abnormal bleeding in the joints or soft tissue.
Signs and symptoms of vulvar cancer may include: Itching that doesn't go away, Pain and tenderness, Bleeding that isn't from menstruation, Skin changes, such as color changes or thickening, A lump, wartlike bumps or an open sore (ulcer).
Make an appointment with your primary care doctor or gynecologist if you experience any persistent symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes vulvar cancer.
In general, doctors know that cancer begins when a cell develops changes (mutations) in its DNA. The DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The mutations tell the cell to grow and divide rapidly. The cell and its offspring go on living when other normal cells would die. The accumulating cells form a tumor that may be cancerous, invading nearby tissue and spreading to other parts of the body.
The type of cell in which vulvar cancer begins helps your doctor plan the most effective treatment. The most common types of vulvar cancer include:
Vulvar squamous cell carcinoma. This cancer begins in the thin, flat cells that line the surface of the vulva. Most vulvar cancers are squamous cell carcinomas.
Vulvar melanoma. This cancer begins in the pigment-producing cells found in the skin of the vulva.
Although the exact cause of vulvar cancer isn't known, certain factors appear to increase your risk of the disease, including:
Increasing age. The risk of vulvar cancer increases with age, though it can occur at any age. The average age at diagnosis is 65.
Being exposed to human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is a sexually transmitted infection that increases the risk of several cancers, including vulvar cancer and cervical cancer. Many young, sexually active people are exposed to HPV, but for most the infection goes away on its own. For some, the infection causes cell changes and increases the risk of cancer in the future.
Smoking. Smoking increases the risk of vulvar cancer.
Having a weakened immune system. People who take medications to suppress the immune system, such as those who've undergone organ transplant, and those with conditions that weaken the immune system, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), have an increased risk of vulvar cancer.
Having a history of precancerous conditions of the vulva. Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia is a precancerous condition that increases the risk of vulvar cancer. Most instances of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia will never develop into cancer, but a small number do go on to become invasive vulvar cancer. For this reason, your doctor may recommend treatment to remove the area of abnormal cells and periodic follow-up checks.
Having a skin condition involving the vulva. Lichen sclerosus, which causes the vulvar skin to become thin and itchy, increases the risk of vulvar cancer.
The main vulvodynia symptom is pain in your genital area, which can be characterized as: Burning, Soreness, Stinging, Rawness, Painful intercourse (dyspareunia), Throbbing, Itching.
Your pain might be constant or occasional. It might occur only when the sensitive area is touched (provoked). You might feel the pain in your entire vulvar area (generalized), or the pain might be localized to a certain area, such as the opening of your vagina (vestibule).
Vulvar tissue might look slightly inflamed or swollen. More often, your vulva appears normal.
A similar condition, vestibulodynia, causes pain only when pressure is applied to the area surrounding the entrance to your vagina.
Although women often don't mention vulvodynia to their doctors, the condition is fairly common.
If you have pain in your genital area, discuss it with your doctor or ask for a referral to a gynecologist. It's important to have your doctor rule out more easily treatable causes of vulvar pain — for instance, yeast or bacterial infections, herpes, precancerous skin conditions, genitourinary syndrome of menopause, and medical problems such as diabetes.
It's also important not to repeatedly use over-the-counter treatments for yeast infections without seeing your doctor. Once your doctor has evaluated your symptoms, he or she can recommend treatments or ways to help you manage your pain.
Doctors don't know what causes vulvodynia, but possible contributing factors include: Injury to or irritation of the nerves surrounding your vulvar region, Past vaginal infections, Allergies or sensitive skin, Hormonal changes, Muscle spasm or weakness in the pelvic floor, which supports the uterus, bladder and bowel.
Because it can be painful and frustrating and can keep you from wanting sex, vulvodynia can cause emotional problems. For example, fear of having sex can cause spasms in the muscles around your vagina (vaginismus). Other complications might include: Anxiety, Depression, Sleep disturbances, Sexual dysfunction, Altered body image, Relationship problems, Decreased quality of life.
Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia is slow growing and may not cause signs and symptoms for many years.
When they do occur, signs and symptoms may include: Easy bruising, Bleeding from the nose or the gums, Fatigue, Weight loss, Numbness in your hands or feet, Fever, Headache, Shortness of breath, Changes in vision, Confusion.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
It's not clear what causes Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia.
Doctors know that the disease begins with one abnormal white blood cell that develops errors (mutations) in its genetic code. The errors tell the cell to continue multiplying rapidly.
Because cancer cells don't mature and then die as normal cells do, they accumulate, eventually overwhelming production of healthy cells. In the bone marrow — the soft, blood-producing tissue that fills in the center of most of your bones — Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia cells crowd out healthy blood cells.
Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia cells continue trying to produce antibodies, as healthy white blood cells do, but instead they produce abnormal proteins that the body can't use. The protein immunoglobulin M (IgM) accumulates in the blood, impairs circulation and causes complications.
Factors that may increase your risk of Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia include:
Being older. Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia can occur at any age, but it's most often diagnosed in adults 65 and older.
Being male. Males are more likely to be diagnosed with Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia.
Being white. White people are more likely to develop the disease, compared with people of other races.
Having a family history of lymphoma. If you have a relative who has been diagnosed with Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia or another type of B-cell lymphoma, you may have an increased risk.
Most people infected with the West Nile virus have no signs or symptoms.
About 20 percent of people develop a mild infection called West Nile fever. Common signs and symptoms include: Fever, Headache, Body aches, Vomiting, Diarrhea, Fatigue, Skin rash.
In less than 1 percent of infected people, the virus causes a serious neurological infection, including inflammation of the brain (encephalitis) and of the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis).
Signs and symptoms of neurological infections include: High fever, Severe headache, Stiff neck, Disorientation or confusion, Stupor or coma, Tremors or muscle jerking, Seizures, Partial paralysis or muscle weakness.
Signs and symptoms of West Nile fever usually last a few days, but signs and symptoms of encephalitis or meningitis can linger for weeks or months. Certain neurological effects, such as muscle weakness, can be permanent.
Mild symptoms of West Nile fever usually resolve on their own. For signs or symptoms of serious infection, such as severe headaches, a stiff neck, disorientation or confusion, seek medical attention right away. A serious infection generally requires hospitalization.
Typically, West Nile virus spreads to humans and animals via infected mosquitoes. Mosquitoes become infected when they feed on infected birds. You can't get infected from casual contact with an infected person or animal.
Most West Nile virus infections occur during warm weather, when mosquitos are active. The incubation period — the period between when you're bitten by an infected mosquito and the appearance of signs and symptoms of the illness — ranges from two to 14 days.
West Nile virus has occurred in Africa, Asia, Europe and the Middle East. It appeared in the United States in the summer of 1999, and since then has been reported in every state except Hawaii and Alaska, as well as in Canada.
In a few cases, West Nile virus might have spread through other routes, including organ transplantation and blood transfusion. However, blood donors are screened for the virus, substantially reducing the risk of infection from blood transfusions.
There also have been reports of possible transmission of the virus from mother to child during pregnancy or breast-feeding or exposure to the virus in a lab, but these are rare and not conclusively confirmed.
Most cases of West Nile virus in the United States occur June through September. Cases have been reported in all 48 lower states.
Even if you're infected, your risk of developing a serious West Nile virus-related illness is extremely small — less than 1 percent of people who are infected become severely ill. And most people who do become sick recover fully. You're more likely to develop a severe or fatal infection based on:
Age. Being older puts you at higher risk.
Certain medical conditions. Certain diseases, such as cancer, diabetes, hypertension and kidney disease, increase your risk. So does receiving an organ transplant.
Wet macular degeneration symptoms usually appear suddenly and worsen rapidly. They may include: Visual distortions, such as straight lines seeming bent, Reduced central vision in one or both eyes, Decreased intensity or brightness of colors, A well-defined blurry spot or blind spot in your field of vision, A general haziness in your overall vision, Abrupt onset and rapid worsening of symptoms.
Macular degeneration doesn't affect side (peripheral) vision, so it rarely causes total blindness.
See your eye doctor if: You notice changes in your central vision, Your ability to see colors and fine detail becomes impaired.
These changes may be the first indication of macular degeneration, particularly if you're older than age 50.
No one knows the exact cause of wet macular degeneration, but it develops in people who have had dry macular degeneration. Of all people with age-related macular degeneration, about 10 percent have the wet form.
Wet macular degeneration can develop in different ways:
Vision loss caused by abnormal blood vessel growth. Sometimes abnormal new blood vessels grow from the choroid under and into the macula (choroidal neovascularization). The choroid is the layer of blood vessels between the retina and the outer, firm coat of the eye (sclera). These abnormal blood vessels may leak fluid or blood, interfering with the retina's function.
Vision loss caused by fluid buildup in the back of the eye. When fluid leaks from the choroid, it can collect between the thin cell layer called the retinal pigment epithelium and the retina. This may cause a bump in the macula, resulting in vision loss or distortion.
Factors that may increase your risk of macular degeneration include:
Age. This disease is most common in people over 50.
Family history. This disease has a hereditary component. Researchers have identified several genes related to developing the condition.
Race. Macular degeneration is more common in white people.
Smoking. Smoking cigarettes or being regularly exposed to smoke significantly increases your risk of macular degeneration.
Obesity. Research indicates that being obese increases the chance that early or intermediate macular degeneration will progress to a more severe form of the disease.
Cardiovascular disease. If you have diseases that affect your heart and blood vessels, you may be at higher risk of macular degeneration.
People whose wet macular degeneration has progressed to central vision loss have a higher risk of depression and social isolation. With profound loss of vision, people may see visual hallucinations (Charles Bonnet syndrome).
A child or adult with wheat allergy is likely to develop signs and symptoms within minutes to hours after eating something containing wheat. Wheat allergy signs and symptoms include: Swelling, itching or irritation of the mouth or throat, Hives, itchy rash or swelling of the skin, Nasal congestion, Headache, Difficulty breathing, Cramps, nausea or vomiting, Diarrhea, Anaphylaxis.
For some people, wheat allergy may cause a life-threatening reaction called anaphylaxis. In addition to other signs and symptoms of wheat allergy, anaphylaxis may cause: Swelling or tightness of the throat, Chest pain or tightness, Severe difficulty breathing, Trouble swallowing, Pale, blue skin color, Dizziness or fainting.
If someone shows signs of anaphylaxis, call 911 or your local emergency number. Anaphylaxis is a medical emergency that requires immediate care.
If you suspect that you or your child is allergic to wheat or another food, see your doctor.
If you have wheat allergy, exposure to a wheat protein primes your immune system for an allergic reaction. You can develop an allergy to any of the four classes of wheat proteins — albumin, globulin, gliadin and gluten.
Some sources of wheat proteins are obvious, such as bread, but all wheat proteins — and gluten in particular — can be found in many prepared foods and even in some cosmetics, bath products and play dough. Foods that may include wheat proteins include: Breads and bread crumbs, Cakes, muffins and cookies, Breakfast cereals, Pasta, Couscous, Farina, Semolina, Spelt, Crackers, Hydrolyzed vegetable protein, Soy sauce, Meat products, such as hot dogs, Dairy products, such as ice cream, Natural flavorings, Gelatinized starch, Modified food starch, Vegetable gum.
If you have wheat allergy, it's possible you might also be allergic to barley, oats and rye. Unless you're allergic to grains other than wheat, though, the recommended wheat-free diet is less restrictive than a gluten-free diet.
Some people with wheat allergy develop symptoms only if they exercise within a few hours after eating wheat. Exercise-induced changes in your body either trigger an allergic reaction or worsen an immune system response to a wheat protein. This condition usually results in life-threatening anaphylaxis.
Certain factors may put you at greater risk of developing wheat allergy:
Family history. You're at increased risk of allergy to wheat or other foods if your parents have food allergies or other allergies, such as asthma.
Age. Wheat allergy is most common in babies and toddlers, who have immature immune and digestive systems. Most children outgrow wheat allergy by 16, but adults can develop it, often as a cross-sensitivity to grass pollen.
Signs and symptoms of whiplash usually develop within days of the injury, and may include: Neck pain and stiffness, Worsening of pain with neck movement, Loss of range of motion in the neck, Headaches, most often starting at the base of the skull, Tenderness or pain in the shoulder, upper back or arms, Tingling or numbness in the arms, Fatigue, Dizziness.
Some people also have: Blurred vision, Ringing in the ears (tinnitus), Sleep disturbances, Irritability, Difficulty concentrating, Memory problems, Depression.
See your doctor if you have any neck pain or other whiplash symptoms after a car accident, sports injury or other traumatic injury. It's important to get a prompt and accurate diagnosis and to rule out broken bones or other damage that can cause or worsen symptoms.
Whiplash typically occurs when your head is forcefully and quickly thrown backward and then forward. This motion can injure bones in the spine, disks between the bones, ligaments, muscles, nerves and other tissues of the neck.
A whiplash injury may result from:
Auto accidents. Rear-end collisions are a major cause of whiplash.
Physical abuse or assault. Whiplash can occur if you are punched or shaken. It's one of the injuries seen in shaken baby syndrome.
Contact sports. Football tackles and other sports-related collisions can sometimes cause whiplash.
Most people who have whiplash feel better within a few weeks and don't seem to have any lasting effects from the injury. However, some people continue to have pain for several months or years after the injury occurred.
It is difficult to predict how each person with whiplash may recover. In general, you may be more likely to have chronic pain if your first symptoms were intense, started rapidly and included: Severe neck pain, More-limited range of motion, Pain that spread to the arms.
The following risk factors have been linked to a worse outcome: Having had whiplash before, Older age, Existing low back or neck pain, A high-speed injury.
Digestive signs and symptoms are common in Whipple disease and may include: Diarrhea, Abdominal cramping and pain, which may worsen after meals, Weight loss, associated with the malabsorption of nutrients.
Other frequent signs and symptoms associated with Whipple disease include: Inflamed joints, particularly the ankles, knees and wrists, Fatigue, Weakness, Anemia.
In some cases, signs and symptoms of Whipple disease may include: Fever, Cough, Enlarged lymph nodes, Skin darkening (hyperpigmentation) in areas exposed to the sun and in scars, Chest pain, Enlarged spleen.
Neurological signs and symptoms may include: Difficulty walking, Visual impairment, including lack of control of eye movements, Confusion, Memory loss.
Symptoms tend to develop slowly over many years in most people with this disease. In some cases, symptoms such as joint pain and weight loss develop years before the digestive symptoms that lead to diagnosis.
Whipple disease is potentially life-threatening, yet usually treatable. Contact your doctor if you experience unusual signs or symptoms, such as unexplained weight loss or joint pain. Your doctor can perform tests to determine the cause of your symptoms.
Even after the infection is diagnosed and you're receiving treatment, let your doctor know if your symptoms don't improve. Sometimes antibiotic therapy isn't effective because the bacteria are resistant to the particular drug you're taking. The disease can recur, so it's important to watch for the re-emergence of symptoms.
Whipple disease is caused by a type of bacterium called Tropheryma whipplei. The bacteria affect the mucosal lining of your small intestine first, forming small lesions within the intestinal wall. The bacteria also damage the fine, hairlike projections (villi) that line the small intestine.
Not much is known about the bacteria. Although they seem readily present in the environment, scientists don't know where they come from or how they're spread to humans. Not everyone who carries the bacteria develops the disease. Some researchers believe that people with the disease may have a genetic defect in their immune system response that makes them more likely to become sick when exposed to the bacteria.
Whipple disease is extremely uncommon, affecting fewer than 1 in 1 million people.
Because so little is known about the bacteria that cause Whipple disease, risk factors for the disease haven't been clearly identified. Based on available reports, it appears more likely to affect: Men ages 40-60, White people in North America and Europe, Farmers and other people who work outdoors and have frequent contact with sewage and wastewater.
The lining of your small intestine has fine, hairlike projections (villi) that help your body absorb nutrients. Whipple disease damages the villi, impairing nutrient absorption. Nutritional deficiencies are common in people with Whipple disease and can lead to fatigue, weakness, weight loss and joint pain.
Whipple disease is a progressive and potentially fatal disease. Although the infection is rare, associated deaths continue to be reported, due in large part to late diagnoses and delayed treatment. Death often is caused by the spread of the infection to the central nervous system, which can cause irreversible damage.
Once you become infected with whooping cough, it takes about seven to 10 days for signs and symptoms to appear, though it can sometimes take longer. They're usually mild at first and resemble those of a common cold: Runny nose, Nasal congestion, Red, watery eyes, Fever, Cough.
After a week or two, signs and symptoms worsen. Thick mucus accumulates inside your airways, causing uncontrollable coughing. Severe and prolonged coughing attacks may: Provoke vomiting, Result in a red or blue face, Cause extreme fatigue, End with a high-pitched "whoop" sound during the next breath of air.
However, many people don't develop the characteristic whoop. Sometimes, a persistent hacking cough is the only sign that an adolescent or adult has whooping cough.
Infants may not cough at all. Instead, they may struggle to breathe, or they may even temporarily stop breathing.
Call your doctor if prolonged coughing spells cause you or your child to: Vomit, Turn red or blue, Seem to be struggling to breathe or have noticeable pauses in breathing, Inhale with a whooping sound.
Whooping cough is caused by a type of bacteria called Bordetella pertussis. When an infected person coughs or sneezes, tiny germ-laden droplets are sprayed into the air and breathed into the lungs of anyone who happens to be nearby.
The whooping cough vaccine you receive as a child eventually wears off. This leaves most teenagers and adults susceptible to the infection during an outbreak — and there continue to be regular outbreaks.
Infants who are younger than age 12 months who are unvaccinated or haven't received the full set of recommended vaccines have the highest risk for severe complications and death.
Teens and adults often recover from whooping cough with no problems. When complications occur, they tend to be side effects of the strenuous coughing, such as: Bruised or cracked ribs, Abdominal hernias, Broken blood vessels in the skin or the whites of your eyes.
In infants — especially those under 6 months of age — complications from whooping cough are more severe and may include: Pneumonia, Slowed or stopped breathing, Dehydration or weight loss due to feeding difficulties, Seizures, Brain damage.
Because infants and toddlers are at greatest risk of complications from whooping cough, they're more likely to need treatment in a hospital. Complications can be life-threatening for infants younger than 6 months old.
Signs and symptoms of Wilms' tumor vary widely, and some children don't show any obvious signs. But most children with Wilms' tumor experience one or more of these signs and symptoms: An abdominal mass you can feel, Abdominal swelling, Abdominal pain.
Other signs and symptoms may include: Fever, Blood in the urine, Nausea or vomiting or both, Constipation, Loss of appetite, Shortness of breath, High blood pressure.
Make an appointment with your child's doctor if you notice any signs or symptoms that worry you. Wilms' tumor is rare, so it's much more likely that something else is causing symptoms, but it's important to check out any concerns.
It's not clear what causes Wilms' tumor, but in rare cases, heredity may play a role.
Cancer begins when cells develop errors in their DNA. The errors allow the cells to grow and divide uncontrollably and to go on living when other cells would die. The accumulating cells form a tumor. In Wilms' tumor, this process occurs in the kidney cells.
In rare cases, the errors in DNA that lead to Wilms' tumor are passed from a parent to the child. In most cases, there is no known connection between parents and children that may lead to cancer.
Factors that may increase the risk of Wilms' tumor include:
African-American race. In the United States, African-American children have a slightly higher risk of developing Wilms' tumor than children of other races. Asian-American children appear to have a lower risk than children of other races.
Family history of Wilms' tumor. If someone in your child's family has had Wilms' tumor, then your child has an increased risk of developing the disease.
Wilms' tumor occurs more frequently in children with certain abnormalities or syndromes present at birth, including:
Aniridia. In aniridia (an-ih-RID-e-uh), the iris — the colored portion of the eye — forms only partially or not at all.
Hemihypertrophy. Hemihypertrophy (hem-e-hi-PUR-truh-fee) means one side of the body or a part of the body is noticeably larger than the other side.
Wilms' tumor can occur as part of rare syndromes, including:
WAGR syndrome. This syndrome includes Wilms' tumor, aniridia, genital and urinary system abnormalities, and intellectual disabilities.
Denys-Drash syndrome. This syndrome includes Wilms' tumor, kidney disease and male pseudohermaphroditism (soo-do-her-MAF-roe-dit-iz-um), in which a boy is born with testicles but may exhibit female characteristics.
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Children with this syndrome tend to be significantly larger than average (macrosomia). Other signs may include abdominal organs that jut out into the base of the umbilical cord, a large tongue (macroglossia), enlarged internal organs and ear abnormalities. There is also an increased risk of tumors, including a type of liver cancer called hepatoblastoma.
Wilson's disease is present at birth, but signs and symptoms don't appear until the copper builds up in the brain, liver or other organ. Signs and symptoms vary depending on the parts of your body affected by the disease. They can include: Fatigue, lack of appetite or abdominal pain, A yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eye (jaundice), Golden-brown eye discoloration (Kayser-Fleischer rings), Fluid buildup in the legs or abdomen, Problems with speech, swallowing or physical coordination, Uncontrolled movements or muscle stiffness.
Make an appointment with your doctor if you have signs and symptoms that worry you, especially if a family member has Wilson's disease.
Wilson's disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, which means that to develop the disease you must inherit one copy of the defective gene from each parent. If you receive only one abnormal gene, you won't become ill yourself, but you're a carrier and can pass the gene to your children.
You can be at increased risk of Wilson's disease if your parents or siblings have the condition. Ask your doctor whether you should undergo genetic testing to find out if you have Wilson's disease. Diagnosing the condition as early as possible dramatically increases the chances of successful treatment.
Untreated, Wilson's disease can be fatal. Serious complications include:
Scarring of the liver (cirrhosis). As liver cells try to make repairs to damage done by excess copper, scar tissue forms in the liver, making it more difficult for the liver to function.
Liver failure. This can occur suddenly (acute liver failure), or it can develop slowly over years. A liver transplant might be a treatment option.
Persistent neurological problems. Tremors, involuntary muscle movements, clumsy gait and speech difficulties usually improve with treatment for Wilson's disease. However, some people have persistent neurological difficulty despite treatment.
Kidney problems. Wilson's disease can damage the kidneys, leading to problems such as kidney stones and an abnormal number of amino acids excreted in the urine.
Psychological problems. These might include personality changes, depression, irritability, bipolar disorder or psychosis.
Blood problems. These might include destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis) leading to anemia and jaundice.
Anyone, even babies, can have the symptoms of WPW syndrome, which result from changes in heart rhythm.
Common symptoms of WPW syndrome include: A rapid, fluttering or pounding heartbeat (palpitations), Dizziness or lightheadedness, Shortness of breath, Fatigue, Anxiety, Chest pain, Difficulty breathing, Fainting.
An episode of a fast heartbeat can begin suddenly and last a few seconds or several hours. Episodes can occur during exercise or while at rest. Caffeine or other stimulants and alcohol trigger symptoms for some people.
Signs and symptoms in infants with WPW syndrome can include: Grayish or blueish (ashen) skin color, Restlessness or irritability, Rapid breathing, Poor eating.
A number of conditions can cause irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia). It's important to get a prompt diagnosis and care. See your doctor if you or your child has symptoms of WPW syndrome.
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have any of the following symptoms for more than a few minutes: Rapid or irregular heartbeat, Difficulty breathing, Chest pain.
The extra electrical pathway that causes a rapid heartbeat is present at birth. An abnormal gene is the cause in a small percentage of people with WPW. The syndrome also is associated with some forms of congenital heart disease, such as Ebstein anomaly.
Otherwise, little is known about why the extra pathway develops.
Your heart is made up of four chambers — two upper chambers (atria) and two lower chambers (ventricles). The rhythm of your heart is normally controlled by a mass of tissue in the right atrium (sinus node). The sinus node produces electrical impulses, or signals, that cause each heartbeat.
These electrical signals travel across the atria, causing muscle contractions that pump blood into the ventricles. The signals then arrive at a cluster of cells called the atrioventricular (AV) node — usually the only pathway for signals to travel from the atria to the ventricles. The AV node slows the electrical signal before sending it to the ventricles.
This slight delay allows the ventricles to fill with blood. When the electrical signals reach the ventricles, muscle contractions pump blood to the lungs and the rest of the body.
In WPW syndrome, an extra electrical pathway connects the atria and ventricles, allowing electrical impulses to bypass the AV node. This detour activates the ventricles too early.
The extra pathway can also transmit electrical impulses from the ventricles back to the atria, disrupting the coordinated movement of the electrical signals through the heart, leading to changes in the heart rhythm.
The most common arrhythmia associated with WPW syndrome is called paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. Some people with WPW syndrome have a type of irregular heartbeat known as atrial fibrillation.
For many people, WPW syndrome doesn't cause serious problems. But complications can occur. It's not always possible to know your risk of serious heart-related events. If WPW syndrome is untreated — particularly if you have other heart conditions — you might have: Fainting spells, Fast heartbeats, Rarely, sudden cardiac arrest.
Wrinkles are the lines and creases that form in your skin. Some wrinkles can become deep crevices or furrows and may be especially noticeable around your eyes, mouth and neck.
If you're concerned about the appearance of your skin, see a dermatologist. He or she can assess your skin and help you create a personalized skin care plan. A dermatologist can also recommend medical wrinkle treatments.
Wrinkles are caused by a combination of factors — some you can control, others you can't:
Age. As you get older, your skin naturally becomes less elastic and more fragile. Decreased production of natural oils dries your skin and makes it appear more wrinkled.
Fat in the deeper layers of your skin diminishes. This causes loose, saggy skin and more-pronounced lines and crevices.
Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light. Ultraviolet radiation, which speeds the natural aging process, is the primary cause of early wrinkling. Exposure to UV light breaks down your skin's connective tissue — collagen and elastin fibers, which lie in the deeper layer of skin (dermis).
Without the supportive connective tissue, your skin loses strength and flexibility. Skin then begins to sag and wrinkle prematurely.
Smoking. Smoking can accelerate the normal aging process of your skin, contributing to wrinkles. This may be due to smoking's effect on collagen.
Repeated facial expressions. Facial movements and expressions, such as squinting or smiling, lead to fine lines and wrinkles. Each time you use a facial muscle, a groove forms beneath the surface of the skin. And as skin ages, it loses its flexibility and is no longer able to spring back in place. These grooves then become permanent features on your face.
Wrist pain may vary, depending on the cause. For example, osteoarthritis pain is often described as being similar to a dull toothache, while carpal tunnel syndrome usually causes a pins-and-needles feeling or a tingling sensation, especially at night. The precise location of your wrist pain also provides clues to what's behind your symptoms.
Not all wrist pain requires medical care. Minor sprains and strains usually respond to ice, rest and over-the-counter pain medications. But if pain and swelling last longer than a few days or become worse, see your doctor. Delayed diagnosis and treatment can lead to poor healing, reduced range of motion and long-term disability.
Damage to any of the parts of your wrist can cause pain and affect your ability to use your wrist and hand.
Sudden impacts. Wrist injuries often occur when you fall forward onto your outstretched hand. This can cause sprains, strains and even fractures. A scaphoid fracture involves a bone on the thumb side of the wrist. This type of fracture may not show up on X-rays immediately after the injury.
Repetitive stress. Any activity that involves repetitive wrist motion — from hitting a tennis ball or bowing a cello to driving cross-country — can inflame the tissues around joints or cause stress fractures, especially when you perform the movement for hours on end without a break. De Quervain's disease is a repetitive stress injury that causes pain at the base of the thumb.
Osteoarthritis. This type of arthritis occurs when the cartilage that cushions the ends of your bones deteriorates over time. Osteoarthritis in the wrist is uncommon and usually occurs only in people who have injured that wrist in the past.
Rheumatoid arthritis. A disorder in which the body's immune system attacks its own tissues, rheumatoid arthritis commonly involves the wrist. If one wrist is affected, the other one usually is, too.
Carpal tunnel syndrome. Carpal tunnel syndrome develops when there's increased pressure on the median nerve as it passes through the carpal tunnel, a passageway in the palm side of your wrist.
Ganglion cysts. These soft tissue cysts occur most often on the part of your wrist opposite your palm. Ganglion cysts may be painful, and pain may either worsen or improve with activity.
Kienbock's disease. This disorder typically affects young adults and involves the progressive collapse of one of the small bones in the wrist. Kienbock's disease occurs when the blood supply to this bone is compromised.
Wrist pain can happen to anyone — whether you're very sedentary, very active or somewhere in between. But your risk may be increased by:
Sports participation. Wrist injuries are common in many sports, both those that involve impact and those that involve repetitive stress on the wrist. These can include football, bowling, golf, gymnastics, snowboarding and tennis.
Repetitive work. Almost any activity that involves your hands and wrists — even knitting and cutting hair — if performed forcefully enough and often enough can lead to disabling wrist pain.
Certain diseases or conditions. Pregnancy, diabetes, obesity, rheumatoid arthritis and gout may increase your risk of developing carpal tunnel syndrome.
Babies with XLA generally appear healthy for the first few months because they're protected by the antibodies they got from their mothers before birth. When these antibodies clear from their systems, the babies begin to develop often severe, recurrent bacterial infections — such as of the ears, lungs, sinuses and skin — that can be life-threating.
Male infants born with XLA have: Very small tonsils, Small or no lymph nodes.
X-linked agammaglobulinemia is caused by a genetic mutation. People with the condition can't produce antibodies that fight infection. About 40% of people with the condition have a family member who has it.
People with XLA can live relatively normal lives and should be encouraged to participate in regular activities for their ages. However, recurrent infections related to XLA will likely require careful attention and aggressive treatment. They can cause organ damage and be life-threatening.
Possible complications include: Chronic lung disease, Increased risk of certain cancers, Infectious arthritis, Increased risk of central nervous system infections from live vaccines.
Yeast infection symptoms can range from mild to moderate, and include: Itching and irritation in the vagina and vulva, A burning sensation, especially during intercourse or while urinating, Redness and swelling of the vulva, Vaginal pain and soreness, Vaginal rash, Thick, white, odor-free vaginal discharge with a cottage cheese appearance, Watery vaginal discharge.
You might have a complicated yeast infection if: You have severe signs and symptoms, such as extensive redness, swelling and itching that leads to tears, cracks or sores, You have four or more yeast infections in a year, Your infection is caused by a less typical type of fungus, You're pregnant, You have uncontrolled diabetes, Your immune system is weakened because of certain medications or conditions such as HIV infection.
Make an appointment with your doctor if: This is the first time you've had yeast infection symptoms, You're not sure whether you have a yeast infection, Your symptoms aren't relieved after treating with over-the-counter antifungal vaginal creams or suppositories, You develop other symptoms.
The fungus candida albicans is responsible for most vaginal yeast infections.
Your vagina naturally contains a balanced mix of yeast, including candida, and bacteria. Certain bacteria (lactobacillus) act to prevent an overgrowth of yeast.
But that balance can be disrupted. An overgrowth of candida or penetration of the fungus into deeper vaginal cell layers causes the signs and symptoms of a yeast infection.
Overgrowth of yeast can result from: Antibiotic use, which causes an imbalance in natural vaginal flora, Pregnancy, Uncontrolled diabetes, An impaired immune system, Taking oral contraceptives or hormone therapy that increase estrogen levels.
Candida albicans is the most common type of fungus to cause yeast infections. Yeast infections caused by other types of candida fungus can be more difficult to treat, and generally need more-aggressive therapies.
Factors that increase your risk of developing a yeast infection include:
Antibiotic use. Yeast infections are common in women who take antibiotics. Broad-spectrum antibiotics, which kill a range of bacteria, also kill healthy bacteria in your vagina, leading to overgrowth of yeast.
Increased estrogen levels. Yeast infections are more common in women with higher estrogen levels — such as pregnant women or women taking high-dose estrogen birth control pills or estrogen hormone therapy.
Uncontrolled diabetes. Women with poorly controlled blood sugar are at greater risk of yeast infections than women with well-controlled blood sugar.
Impaired immune system. Women with lowered immunity — such as from corticosteroid therapy or HIV infection — are more likely to get yeast infections.
During the first three to six days after you've developed yellow fever — the incubation period — you won't experience any signs or symptoms. After this, the infection enters an acute phase and then, in some cases, a toxic phase that can be life-threatening.
Once the infection enters the acute phase, you may experience signs and symptoms including: Fever, Headache, Muscle aches, particularly in your back and knees, Sensitivity to light, Nausea, vomiting or both, Loss of appetite, Dizziness, Red eyes, face or tongue.
These signs and symptoms usually improve and are gone within several days.
Although signs and symptoms may disappear for a day or two following the acute phase, some people with acute yellow fever then enter a toxic phase. During the toxic phase, acute signs and symptoms return and more-severe and life-threatening ones also appear. These can include: Yellowing of your skin and the whites of your eyes (jaundice), Abdominal pain and vomiting, sometimes of blood, Decreased urination, Bleeding from your nose, mouth and eyes, Slow heart rate, Liver and kidney failure, Brain dysfunction, including delirium, seizures and coma.
The toxic phase of yellow fever can be fatal.
Four weeks or more before your trip, make an appointment to see your doctor if you're traveling to an area in which yellow fever is known to occur so that you discuss whether you need the yellow fever vaccine.
If you have less than four weeks to prepare, call your doctor anyway. Ideally, you'll be able to be vaccinated at least three to four weeks before traveling to an area where yellow fever occurs to give the vaccine time to work. Your doctor will help you determine whether you need vaccinations and can provide general guidance on protecting your health while abroad.
Seek emergency medical care if you've recently traveled to a region where yellow fever is known to occur and you develop signs or symptoms of the toxic phase of the disease.
Call your doctor if you develop mild symptoms, after traveling to a region where yellow fever occurs.
Yellow fever is caused by a virus that is spread by the Aedes aegypti mosquito. These mosquitoes thrive in and near human habitations where they breed in even the cleanest water. Most cases of yellow fever occur in sub-Saharan Africa and tropical South America.
Humans and monkeys are most commonly infected with the yellow fever virus. Mosquitoes transmit the virus back and forth between monkeys, humans or both.
When a mosquito bites a human or a monkey infected with yellow fever, the virus enters the mosquito's bloodstream and circulates before settling in the salivary glands. When the infected mosquito bites another monkey or human, the virus then enters the host's bloodstream, where it may cause illness.
You may be at risk of the disease if you travel to an area where mosquitoes continue to carry the yellow fever virus. These areas include sub-Saharan Africa and tropical South America.
Even if there aren't current reports of infected humans in these areas, it doesn't mean you're risk-free. It's possible that local populations have been vaccinated and are protected from the disease, or that cases of yellow fever just haven't been detected and officially reported.
If you're planning on traveling to these areas, you can protect yourself by getting a yellow fever vaccine at least several weeks before traveling.
Anyone can be infected with the yellow fever virus, but older adults are at greater risk of getting seriously ill.
Yellow fever results in death for 20% to 50% of those who develop severe disease. Complications during the toxic phase of a yellow fever infection include kidney and liver failure, jaundice, delirium, and coma.
People who survive the infection recover gradually over a period of several weeks to months, usually without significant organ damage. During this time a person may experience fatigue and jaundice. Other complications include secondary bacterial infections, such as pneumonia or blood infections.
The most common symptom associated with the yips is an involuntary muscle jerk, although some people experience tremors, twitches, spasms or freezing.
In some people, the yips are a type of focal dystonia, a condition that causes involuntary muscle contractions during a specific task. It's most likely related to overuse of a certain set of muscles, similar to writer's cramp. Anxiety worsens the effect.
Some athletes become so anxious and self-focused — overthinking to the point of distraction — that their ability to execute a skill, such as putting, is impaired. "Choking" is an extreme form of performance anxiety that may compromise a golfer's or any athlete's game.
The yips tend to be associated with: Older age, More experience playing golf, Tournament play.
As many as 4 out of 5 people infected with the Zika virus have no signs or symptoms. When symptoms do occur, they usually begin two to seven days after a person is bitten by an infected mosquito. Signs and symptoms of the Zika virus most commonly include: Mild fever, Rash, Joint or muscle pain.
Other signs and symptoms may include: Headache, Red eyes (conjunctivitis).
Most people recover fully, with symptoms resolving in about a week.
See your doctor if you think you or a family member may have the Zika virus, especially if you have recently traveled to an area where there's an ongoing outbreak. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has blood tests to look for the Zika virus or similar diseases such as dengue or chikungunya viruses, which are spread by the same type of mosquitoes.
The Zika virus is transmitted primarily through the bite of an infected aedes species mosquito, which can be found throughout the world. The virus was first identified in the Zika Forest in Uganda in 1947, but outbreaks have since been reported in southeastern and southern Asia, the Pacific Islands and the Americas.
When a mosquito bites a person infected with the Zika virus, the virus enters the mosquito. When the infected mosquito then bites another person, the virus enters that person's bloodstream.
The virus can also spread to the fetus during pregnancy.
Spread of the virus through sexual contact and blood transfusion have been reported.
Factors that put you at greater risk of developing the Zika virus include:
Living or traveling in countries where there have been outbreaks. Being in tropical and subtropical areas increases your risk of exposure to the virus that causes the Zika virus. Especially high-risk areas include several islands of the Pacific region, a number of countries in Central, South and North America, and islands near West Africa. Because the mosquito that carries the Zika virus is found worldwide, it's likely that outbreaks will continue to spread to new regions.
The mosquitoes that carry the Zika virus are found in some parts of the United States. Most cases of the Zika virus infection in the U.S. have been reported in travelers returning to the U.S. But local transmission has been reported in certain areas of the U.S. and in Puerto Rico.
Having unprotected sex. The Zika virus can spread to another person through sex. If male sex partners or a couple that includes a male and female partner travel to an area with a Zika risk, the CDC suggests using condoms or avoiding sex for three months. If female partners travel to an area with a Zika risk, the CDC suggests using condoms or avoiding sex for at least two months. Also, the CDC advises abstinence from sexual activity during pregnancy or condom use during all sexual contact for a pregnant woman or her partner who have traveled to or lived in an area of active Zika virus transmission.
Zika virus infections during pregnancy have been linked to miscarriage and microcephaly, a potentially fatal congenital brain condition.
The Zika virus may also cause congenital Zika syndrome, which includes these birth defects: Severe microcephaly with a partly collapsed skull, Brain damage and reduced brain tissue, Eye damage, Joint problems, including limited motion, Reduced body movement due to too much muscle tone after birth.
The Zika virus also may cause other neurological disorders such as Guillain-Barre syndrome.
Signs and symptoms of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome may include: Abdominal pain, Diarrhea, Burning, aching, gnawing or discomfort in your upper abdomen, Acid reflux and heartburn, Burping, Nausea and vomiting, Bleeding in your digestive tract, Unintended weight loss, Decreased appetite.
See your doctor if you have a persistent, burning, aching or gnawing pain in your upper abdomen, especially if you've also been experiencing nausea, vomiting and diarrhea.
Tell your doctor if you've used over-the-counter acid-reducing medications such as omeprazole (Prilosec, Zegerid), cimetidine (Tagamet HB) or famotidine (Pepcid AC) for long periods of time. These medications may mask your symptoms, which could delay your diagnosis.
The exact cause of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome remains unknown. But the sequence of events that occurs in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is clear. The syndrome begins when one or more tumors (gastrinomas) form in your pancreas or duodenum or at other sites such as the lymph nodes adjacent to your pancreas.
Your pancreas sits behind and below your stomach. It produces enzymes that are essential to digesting food. The pancreas also produces several hormones including insulin, a hormone that helps to control your blood glucose.
Digestive juices from the pancreas, liver and gallbladder mix in the duodenum, the part of the small intestine next to your stomach. This is where digestion reaches its peak.
The tumors that occur with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome are made up of cells that secrete large amounts of the hormone gastrin. Increased gastrin makes the stomach produce far too much acid. The excess acid then leads to peptic ulcers and sometimes to diarrhea.
Besides causing excess acid production, the tumors are often cancerous (malignant). Although the tumors tend to grow slowly, the cancer can spread elsewhere — most commonly to nearby lymph nodes or your liver.
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome may be caused by an inherited condition called multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1 (MEN 1). People with MEN 1 also have tumors in the parathyroid glands and may have tumors in their pituitary glands.
About 25% of people who have gastrinomas have them as part of Men 1. They may also have tumors in the pancreas and other organs.
If you have a blood relative, such as a sibling or parent, with MEN 1, it's more likely that you'll have Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
